---
title: "Maurycy Cyz"
created: 2026-04-09
updated: 2026-04-09
tags: [person, blogger, hn-popular]
aliases: ["maurycyz.com"]
---

# Maurycy Cyz

| | |
|---|---|
| **Blog** | [maurycyz.com](https://maurycyz.com) |
| **RSS** | https://maurycyz.com/index.xml |
| **About** | [https://maurycyz.com/about.html](https://maurycyz.com/about.html) |

## Bio

About this site:
2026-02-03
—
2026-03-23
The content is handwritten in HTML.
The homepage and RSS feed are generated by a custom tool written in ~1000 lines of C, most of which is templates and styling.
Table of contents
Short notes.
Index page.
What's with all the yellow text?
Syntax highlighting
Flashbang mode
Thinking about links
Design graveyard
Because I often come back to old posts
to proofread them,
the site tracks both the original publication date and last modification date.
This is a new feature:
posts that haven't been edited recently are missing the modification date.
Javascript is not required
, even for interactive features like the theme switcher.
In fact, this site works without CSS either:
It is fully functional in text only browsers like lynx.
I don't have a comment section
.
If you want to talk to me, use my email:
blog@maurycyz.com
If you want to talk to other people, use the red or orange sites
—
this small bit of friction reduces the amount of knee-jerk "I got mad at the title"
spam and reminds people that they are taking to a person.
As a bonus, this frees you from the obligation to correct my every mistake:
You're welcome.
There's a kitten on the homepage
(if you are not using a phone) which chases your mouse cursor:
it's good to have more weirdness on the internet when most people's online presence is just a post feed on some "social media" site.
If you don't like it, just disable javascript.
Protip
: this also works for most ads.
Web annoyances
I don

## Recent Posts (topics/interests)

- (no recent posts found)
