---
title: "Agent Deployment Bifurcation"
created: 2026-06-18
type: research-note
source: active-crawl
status: complete
sources:
  - https://hn.algolia.com/api/v1/search?query=boxes.dev+claude+code+agent&tags=story
  - https://boxes.dev/
tags:
  - trending
  - active-crawl
research_summary: |
  Fetched from https://hn.algolia.com/api/v1/search?query=boxes.dev+claude+code+agent&tags=story, 6894 bytes
---

# Agent Deployment Bifurcation

## Source URLs

1. [https://hn.algolia.com/api/v1/search?query=boxes.dev+claude+code+agent&tags=story](https://hn.algolia.com/api/v1/search?query=boxes.dev+claude+code+agent&tags=story)
2. [https://boxes.dev/](https://boxes.dev/)

## Content

{"exhaustive":{"nbHits":false,"typo":false},"exhaustiveNbHits":false,"exhaustiveTypo":false,"hits":[{"_highlightResult":{"author":{"matchLevel":"none","matchedWords":[],"value":"nab"},"story_text":{"fullyHighlighted":false,"matchLevel":"full","matchedWords":["boxes",".","dev","claude","code","agent"],"value":"Hi HN, we\u2019re Nick and Drew, and we\u2019re building <em>boxes.dev</em> \u2013 the first cloud-only <em>agent</em>ic dev environment (ADE) that gives every Codex and <em>Claude</em> <em>Code</em> <em>agent</em> its own cloud computer.<p>We\u2019re two engineers who previously built Gem (co-founder/CTO and first hire), and we spent the last year coding almost exclusively using Codex and <em>Claude</em> <em>Code</em>. It\u2019s been a huge change to how we <em>code</em>, and it\u2019s been exhilarating seeing the models keep getting better \u2013 but we eventually realized that developing on localhost was holding us back:<p>- Git worktrees are clunky to set up and use for parallelizing work\n- It\u2019s 2026, but somehow everyone is still walking around with laptops cracked open or SSHing into mac minis in their garage so their <em>agent</em>s don\u2019t stop working.\n- Mobile is treated like an afterthought even though coding is just texting now\nWe started hitting resource constraints when multiple parallel <em>agent</em>s test their own work by running the full app locally.\n- We tried different products, but couldn\u2019t find any that solved all of our pain points \u2013 so we pivoted and decided to just build the ADE we wanted for ourselves.<p><em>Boxes.dev</em> is a desktop and mobile app that lets you run <em>Claude</em> <em>Code</em>, Codex (using your subscription!), and the full dev environment for whatever you\u2019re building, all on remote compute. It\u2019s similar to Conductor or the Codex desktop app, except everything is in the cloud.<p>We use coding <em>agent</em>s to scan your local dev setup and port it to the cloud. Then every <em>Claude</em> <em>Code</em>/Codex thread starts from a snapshot of the full setup, with its own filesystem and compute. \nNo more git worktrees, no more cracked-open laptops, and your coding <em>agent</em>s can actually test their work end-to-end because they can run your full app in isolation.<p>We\u2019ve mirrored the <em>Claude</em> <em>Code</em> and Codex UX to feel natural to power users, and also have a fully-featured mobile app (no handoffs or remote control), plus scheduled automations and a Slack integration.<p>We\u2019re obviously biased, but we\u2019ve been building <em>boxes.dev</em> with <em>boxes.dev</em> for months and it\u2019s honestly been a gamechanger. It\u2019s hard to go back once you realize how much localhost has been limiting you; based on early feedback from beta testers, we\u2019re increasingly sure that cloud is the future of <em>agent</em>ic coding.<p>We\u2019d love for you to experience it yourselves! Would appreciate any feedback \u2013 and happy to answer any questions on this thread."},"title":{"fullyHighlighted":false,"matchLevel":"partial","matchedWords":["boxes",".","dev","claude","code"],"value":"Show HN: <em>Boxes.dev</em>: ditch localhost; run <em>Claude</em> <em>Code</em> and Codex in the cloud"},"url":{"fullyHighlighted":false,"matchLevel":"partial","matchedWords":["boxes",".","dev"],"value":"https://<em>boxes.dev</em>"}},"_tags":["story","author_nab","story_48399358","show_hn"],"author":"nab","children":[48400566,48400641,48400707,48400758,48400867,48400878,48400947,48401619,48401773,48401840,48402029,48402045,48402063,48402474,48402552,48402607,48402714,48402788,48402807,48404757,48405660,48405988,48406950,48410135,48419090,48419703,48420747,48421405,48436875],"created_at":"2026-06-04T14:38:35Z","created_at_i":1780583915,"num_comments":79,"objectID":"48399358","points":105,"story_id":48399358,"story_text":"Hi HN, we\u2019re Nick and Drew, and we\u2019re building boxes.dev \u2013 the first cloud-only agentic dev environment (ADE) that gives every Codex and Claude Code agent its own cloud computer.<p>We\u2019re two engineers who previously built Gem (co-founder&#x2F;CTO and first hire), and we spent the last year coding almost exclusively using Codex and Claude Code. It\u2019s been a huge change to how we code, and it\u2019s been exhilarating seeing the models keep getting better \u2013 but we eventually realized that developing on localhost was holding us back:<p>- Git worktrees are clunky to set up and use for parallelizing work\n- It\u2019s 2026, but somehow everyone is still walking around with laptops cracked open or SSHing into mac minis in their garage so their agents don\u2019t stop working.\n- Mobile is treated like an afterthought even though coding is just texting now\nWe started hitting resource constraints when multiple parallel agents test their own work by running the full app locally.\n- We tried different products, but couldn\u2019t find any that solved all of our pain points \u2013 so we pivoted and decided to just build the ADE we wanted for ourselves.<p>Boxes.dev is a desktop and mobile app that lets you run Claude Code, Codex (using your subscription!), and the full dev environment for whatever you\u2019re building, all on remote compute. It\u2019s similar to Conductor or the Codex desktop app, except everything is in the cloud.<p>We use coding agents to scan your local dev setup and port it to the cloud. Then every Claude Code&#x2F;Codex thread starts from a snapshot of the full setup, with its own filesystem and compute. \nNo more git worktrees, no more cracked-open laptops, and your coding agents can actually test their work end-to-end because they can run your full app in isolation.<p>We\u2019ve mirrored the Claude Code and Codex UX to feel natural to power users, and also have a fully-featured mobile app (no handoffs or remote control), plus scheduled automations and a Slack integration.<p>We\u2019re obviously biased, but we\u2019ve been building boxes.dev with boxes.dev for months and it\u2019s honestly been a gamechanger. It\u2019s hard to go back once you realize how much localhost has been limiting you; based on early feedback from beta testers, we\u2019re increasingly sure that cloud is the future of agentic coding.<p>We\u2019d love for you to experience it yourselves! Would appreciate any feedback \u2013 and happy to answer any questions on this thread.","title":"Show HN: Boxes.dev: ditch localhost; run Claude Code and Codex in the cloud","updated_at":"2026-06-15T18:31:31Z","url":"https://boxes.dev"}],"hitsPerPage":20,"nbHits":1,"nbPages":1,"page":0,"params":"query=boxes.dev+claude+code+agent&tags=story&advancedSyntax=true&analyticsTags=backend","processingTimeMS":18,"processingTimingsMS":{"_request":{"queue":1,"roundTrip":16},"fetch":{"query":9,"scanning":7,"total":17},"total":18},"query":"boxes.dev claude code agent","serverTimeMS":19}

