---
title: "Cursor Agent CLI · Cursor"
source: "Cursor Blog"
url: "https://cursor.com/blog/cli"
scraped: "2026-05-10T01:19:48.809879+00:00"
lastmod: "2026-05-09T16:09:42.638Z"
type: "sitemap"
---

# Cursor Agent CLI · Cursor

**Source**: [https://cursor.com/blog/cli](https://cursor.com/blog/cli)

Blog
/
product
Aug 7, 2025
·
product
Cursor Agent CLI
Lukas Möller, Ian Huang & Balta Ruiz
·
2 min read
Table of Contents
↑
Our product evolution
Use Cursor Agent in any environment
Get started with the CLI
You can now use Cursor Agent from the
CLI
or headless in any environment.
#
Our product evolution
We want Cursor to be the best place to code with AI.
We started by making text autocomplete more intelligent and context aware. Then, we added the ability to ask AI models questions, and do quick inline edits to your code with ⌘+K.
As the quality of code generated by AI models improved, we added Agent to allow models to generate files, run terminal commands, search your codebase, and more.
This year, we expanded Cursor Agent from the editor to web, mobile, and
Slack
. Cursor Agent is one of the most popular ways developers use the product. Now, we’re making Agent available anywhere.
#
Use Cursor Agent in any environment
You can now use Cursor Agent from the CLI or headless in any environment.
For our customers using Neovim, JetBrains, or other IDEs, this allows them to use the full power of Cursor Agent alongside their favorite tools.
The CLI works with any model as part of your Cursor subscription. You can now choose to use Cursor agent in the editor, or have multiple agents run in parallel in the terminal or remotely.
#
Get started with the CLI
Using Agent through the CLI or headless is now available:
# Install
curl
https://cursor.com/install
-fsSL
|
bash
# Start CLI with a prompt
agent
chat
"find one bug and fix it"
This CLI is still in beta. Security safeguards are still evolving. It can read, modify, and delete files, and execute shell commands you approve. Use at your own risk and only in trusted environments.
We’d love your feedback as you try it out. To learn more, check out the
CLI docs
.
Filed under:
product
Author
s
:
Lukas Möller, Ian Huang & Balta Ruiz
