---
title: "LLVM Weekly - #45, Nov 10th 2014"
url: "https://blog.llvm.org/2014/11/llvm-weekly-45-nov-10th-2014.html"
fetched_at: 2026-05-05T07:01:41.375482+00:00
source: "LLVM Blog"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# LLVM Weekly - #45, Nov 10th 2014

Source: https://blog.llvm.org/2014/11/llvm-weekly-45-nov-10th-2014.html

LLVM Weekly - #45, Nov 10th 2014
Welcome to the forty-fifth issue of LLVM Weekly, a weekly newsletter (published every Monday) covering developments in LLVM, Clang, and related projects. LLVM Weekly is brought to you by
Alex Bradbury
. Subscribe to future issues at
http://llvmweekly.org
and pass it on to anyone else you think may be interested. Please send any tips or feedback to
asb@asbradbury.org
, or
@llvmweekly
or
@asbradbury
on Twitter.
The canonical home for this issue
can be found here at llvmweekly.org
.
News and articles from around the web
Adrian Sampson has posted a
status update on his Quala project
to add custom type annotations to C and C++ in Clang/LLVM.
Bruce Mitchener has posted to the Dylan blog describing
how Dylan integrates with LLVM
. Interestingly, Dylan doesn't link with the LLVM libraries and instead generates bitcode files directly.
The Numba project has released
llvmlite
, lightweight python bindings to LLVM for writing JIT compilers. This was developed based on experience using the old llvmpy bindings.
Obfuscator-LLVM
has been updated to work with LLVM 3.5
.
On the mailing lists
LLVM commits
The PBQP register allocator has had its spill costs and coalescing benefits tweaked. This apparently results in a few percent improvement on benchmarks such as EEMBC and SPEC.
r221292
,
r221293
.
The new SymbolRewriter pass is an IR to IR transformation allowing adjustment of symbols during compilation. It is intended to be used for symbol interpositioning in sanitizers and performance analysis tools.
r221548
.
Hexagon gained a basic ELF object emitter.
r221465
.
llvm-vtabledump gained support for the Itanium ABI.
r221133
.
LLVM's CMake build system gained the
LLVM_BUILD_STATIC
option.
r221345
.
The usage of Inputs/ for extra test files has been documented.
r221406
.
The MIPS backend has reached a milestone in support for the N32/N64 ABI. This commit fixes all known bugs for this ABI and the first 10000 tests generated by ABITest.py pass.
r221534
.
Clang commits
clang-format gained various improvements for formatting Java code.
r221104
,
r221109
, and others.
Support was added for C++1z nested namespace definitions, u8 character literals, and attributes on namespaces or enumerators.
r221574
,
r221576
,
r221580
.
Other project commits
LLD learned how to parse most linker scripts. Before getting too excited, do note this is parsing only, semantic actions will come in the future.
r221126
.
The common Sanitizer code gained a generic stack frame renderer. This allows the user to control the format of stack frame output.
r221409
,
r221469
.
The basic framework for live debugging on Windows was added to LLDB. It will detect changes such as DLL loads and unloads etc, but these need to be propagated through LLDB properly.
r221207
.
lldb-gdbserver now supports the Android target.
r221570
.
