---
title: "LLM Use in the Python Source Code"
url: "https://blog.miguelgrinberg.com/post/llm-use-in-the-python-source-code"
fetched_at: 2026-04-28T07:02:07.608933+00:00
source: "miguelgrinberg.com"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# LLM Use in the Python Source Code

Source: https://blog.miguelgrinberg.com/post/llm-use-in-the-python-source-code

There is a trick that is spreading through social media. If you block the
claude
user on GitHub, then each time you visit a GitHub repository that has commits by this user you get a banner at the top alerting you of the user's participation. It's an easy way to spot projects that have started to rely on coding agents, in this case on Claude Code specifically.
Imagine the surprise when you see that
CPython
, one of the most popular open-source projects in the world, is now receiving contributions from
claude
:
What does this mean, exactly?
A repository having the
claude
user flagged in this way means that the project has at least one commit in which this user appears as author or co-author.
In accurate terms, it means that one or more commits in the project have this or something similar in the commit message:
Co-Authored-By: Claude Opus 4.5 <noreply@anthropic.com>
This could happen if a developer working on the Python source code allows Claude Code to commit code changes on its own to their local clone of the Python git repository. Eventually the developer pushes whatever work they were doing with Claude Code assistance to the CPython project on GitHub, and here the
claude
user goes along with it, appearing as a co-author with the developer in the pushed commit.
What we cannot tell is which specific lines in a commit were generated by Anthropic's coding tool. Also we cannot tell if there are other commits in the Python source code that were generated by coding assistants but were manually committed by the developer under their name. The only thing we can tell with certainty is that
the CPython project is allowing developers to use LLMs
, either explicitly or implicitly by not having a clear policy that forbids it.
So far there are only 8 commits with user
claude
as co-author, made over the last six months or so. They cover a small portion of the code, so there is no reason to panic just yet.
How I feel about this
This rubs me the wrong way on several levels. I can't say that I'm surprised, but yeah, it is a big disappointment.
Of course there are the environmental, ethical, moral and even legal issues associated with the use of LLMs. I do not see value in bringing up these arguments here, simply because they do not seem to be effective at persuading people to stop using these tools. What I'll do is mention a couple of additional reasons that concern me about this particular situation.
First of all, I feel allowing developers to use LLMs or coding assistants in their contributions to CPython robs people in the Python community from the opportunity of making such contributions themselves, and learning from the experience. I can't really imagine that CPython is having issues finding contributors, so why choose to generate code with an LLM instead of giving access to people willing to help out, become involved and grow as developers?
I also don't really agree with the idea that code that was generated with an LLM coding tool should be attributed, in whole or in part, to the tool itself. The fact that Claude Code "signs" its commits with a made-up user feels ridiculous to me. In my opinion, the developer that is driving the tool should assume full ownership and responsibility for the code that is generated by a coding tool under their supervision.
Now don't get me wrong, I think it is a good idea for code that was generated with LLMs to be flagged in some way, but giving attribution of the code to an entity that does not exist is not the way. I hope CPython stops allowing this. And if they decide to keep accepting LLM-generated code in the future, then they should find a proper way to identify such contributions without altering ownership. They should also figure out a solution that applies to all the tools of this type and not just Claude Code.
What I would really like to ask of the CPython project is
transparency
. Do you allow core developers to use LLMs for coding? What about regular contributors? For which kinds of tasks? Are there any tasks for which coding assistance is not allowed? Do you require contributors to declare if their contributions were made with the help of LLMs?
I have many more questions. I hope they share more information with regard to their use of LLMs and coding agents going forward.
Update
: Hugo van Kemenade
sent
a link to the
Generative AI
page in the Python Developer's Guide. I had seen this, but it did not seem to be a "policy" but more an informational page. In any case, the "Acceptable uses" section does not mention contributing code to CPython, and the "Unaceptable uses" section does not clearly forbid it, so it remains vague, in my opinion. There are indirect references to contributions made with LLMs in the "Considerations for success" section though.
Thank you for visiting my blog! If you enjoyed this article, please consider supporting my work and keeping me caffeinated with a small one-time donation through
Buy me a coffee
. Thanks!
