---
title: "LLVM Weekly - #100, Nov 30th 2015"
url: "https://blog.llvm.org/2015/11/llvm-weekly-100-nov-30th-2015.html"
fetched_at: 2026-05-05T07:01:39.747981+00:00
source: "LLVM Blog"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# LLVM Weekly - #100, Nov 30th 2015

Source: https://blog.llvm.org/2015/11/llvm-weekly-100-nov-30th-2015.html

LLVM Weekly - #100, Nov 30th 2015
Welcome to the one hundredth issue of LLVM Weekly, a weekly newsletter (published every Monday) covering developments in LLVM, Clang, and related projects. LLVM Weekly is brought to you by
Alex Bradbury
. Subscribe to future issues at
http://llvmweekly.org
and pass it on to anyone else you think may be interested. Please send any tips or feedback to
asb@asbradbury.org
, or
@llvmweekly
or
@asbradbury
on Twitter.
Eagle-eyed readers will note we've now reached issue 100, marking 100 weeks of uninterrupted service and of course meaning there's just 28 weeks to go until an important numerical milestone.
The canonical home for this issue
can be found here at llvmweekly.org
.
News and articles from around the web
There is going to be an LLVM Devroom at FOSDEM next year and the
call for proposals
closes on December 1st. Get your submissions in!
Most slides from the recent LLVM in HPC workshop have
now been posted
.
Jeff Trull has posted a great
blog post on fuzzing C++ code with AFL and libFuzzer
.
On the mailing lists
LLVM commits
A number of patches related to ARMv8.2-A have landed. Public documentation doesn't seem to have been released for this architecture revision, but the patches indicate some of the new features including: persistent memory instruction and FP16 instructions. You can see the patches still in review
here
.
r254156
,
r254198
.
A series of helper functions from SelectionDAGNodes have been exposed (isNullConstant, isNullFPConstant, isAllOnesConstant, isOneConstant). These helpers can help simplify code in your target's ISelLowering.
r254085
.
The WebAssembly backend's block placement algorithm has been improved.
r253876
.
Tests generated from
utils/update_llc_test_checks.py
are now marked as autogenerated.
r253917
.
Clang commits
DataRecursiveASTVisitor has been removed, and RecursiveASTVisitor can be used in its place. This resulted in the removal of 2912 lines of code.
r253948
.
Sparc and SparcV9 default to using an external assembler again.
r254199
Functions with the interrupt attribute are now supported for mips32r2+.
r254205
.
Other project commits
A single DataFlowSanitizer or ThreadSanitizer-instrumented binary can now run on both 39-bit virtual address space and 42-bit virtual address space AArch64 platforms.
r254151
,
r254197
.
lldb gained a
swig_bot.py
for generating bindings.
r254022
.
