---
title: "Beyond “Beyond the wall”"
url: "https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/quasiblog/aperiodic-followup/"
fetched_at: 2026-04-27T07:57:02.103647+00:00
source: "chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# Beyond “Beyond the wall”

Source: https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/quasiblog/aperiodic-followup/

Beyond “Beyond the wall”
Some more thoughts on finite-state transducers for aperiodic tilings
[Simon Tatham, 2024-07-16]
[Part of a series:
Penrose and hats
|
Spectres
|
finite-state transducers
|
more transducers
|
refining tilings
]
Introduction
The more articles in a series you write, the harder it becomes
      to write the introductions.
This is now my
fourth
article on the subject of
      generating aperiodic tilings by using string-processing
      algorithms. In two last year, I described recursive algorithms
      that allowed practical software generation of random patches of
      Penrose, hat and Spectre tilings while avoiding integer
      overflow, floating-point errors, or wasting lots of time on
      generating parts of the tiling that were only going to be thrown
      away. And in a followup last month, I found a way to replace the
      recursive algorithm with a non-backtracking finite state
      machine, giving slightly better performance, but also making it
      possible to generate (and also, sometimes, discover)
      particularly interesting non-random instances of all of those
      tilings.
That last article, ‘
Beyond
      the Wall
’, took me a long time to write, because when I’d
      nearly finished it, I fixed one last bug in my code and found it
      had completely changed my conclusions, so I had to rewrite half
      of what I’d already written. So by the time I was finished, I
      thought, phew, it’s time for a rest, let’s think about something
      other than tilings.
But I had so much interesting feedback from ‘Beyond the Wall’
      that I quickly found there was enough material for a followup
      article. And
then
I also made a breakthrough of my own,
      improving the previous article’s algorithms so they can handle
      really hard tilings that I didn’t know how to do last month.
So here’s the followup article, containing everything I’ve
      learned since the last one!
Recap of the setup
As I write more articles in this series, it also becomes harder
      to recap everything that’s gone before. If you haven’t read
      ‘Beyond the Wall’ then perhaps not a lot of this will make
      sense. It’s probably best to treat this article as one of those
      sequels that really
expects
you to remember the
      previous episode.
But I’ll give it a quick try anyway. If this doesn’t make
      enough sense, there are three previous articles in the series –
      linked from the header above – to fill in more detail.
All of the Penrose, hat and Spectre tilings are generated by
      various ‘substitution systems’, which give a procedure for
      turning one tiling of the plane into a finer one by substituting
      each tile for a collection of smaller ‘subtiles’ in a fixed
      pattern. Moreover, every tiling of the plane can be shown to be
      a possible
output
of this process, starting from a
      larger set of ‘supertiles’. (That’s normally how you prove
      tilings like this are aperiodic.)
This idea allows you to take a single tile
T
in a
      tiling, and assign it an infinite sequence of ‘coordinates’
      describing its place in the substitution hierarchy. You start by
      saying what type
T
itself is; then you say what type its
      supertile
S
is, and identify which of
S
’s
      subtiles
T
corresponds to. And then you give the same
      information relating
S
to its supertile
S
′, and so
      on.
In my notation, I write this as a tile type, followed by a
      sequence of (supertile type, child index) pairs, where the
      ‘child index’ refers to an arbitrary numbering system I chose
      for the subtiles of each supertile. For example, in the hat HTPF
      substitution system, where after the first layer of actual hats
      you have metatiles named by those four letters, a tile’s
      coordinates might start something like “hat, (F, 0), (H, 2),
      (F, 1), …”. This is saying that the tile is a hat, which is #0
      of a lowest-order F metatile (this type expands into two hats,
      which my arbitrary numbering system indexes as #0 and #1); that
      F in turn is child #2 of a higher-order H (in another arbitrary
      numbering system I chose), which is #1 of another F, and so
      on.
(For the triangle-based substitution systems for Penrose
      tilings I vary this slightly. Those systems have the property
      that no supertile has two subtiles of the same type, so I leave
      out the child indices and just give the sequence of triangle
      types, which is unambiguous and a lot shorter.)
These coordinates are purely combinatorial: they don’t describe
      the tile’s
geometric
position in the plane at all,
      still less the position of any of its supertiles. They only
      describe its place within the hierarchy of parent/child
      relationships between tiles and supertiles. And it turns out to
      be possible to determine the combinatorial coordinates of a
      tile’s neighbour, starting from those of the tile itself, by one
      of two algorithms:
Recursively ascend the layers of the hierarchy until you
        find a supertile containing both the tile and its neighbour.
        Then the coordinates from that point on are all the same
        between the two tiles, and you can work back down from that
        point generating the low-order coordinates of the neighbour.
Where possible, use a finite-state transducer to output the
        neighbour’s coordinates from the low order upwards, by
        consuming the original coordinates in the same order. The
        output will sometimes lag behind the input, but only by a
        bounded distance.
In each case, you also tell the algorithm which edge of the
      starting tile you want to cross, and the output tells you not
      only what tile is on the other side of that edge, but which edge
      of the destination tile corresponds to the specified edge of the
      source tile.
The transducer approach is more powerful in one way: it doesn’t
      depend on there
being
any single supertile containing
      both the tile and its neighbour. Therefore it can cross
      ‘infinite-order supertile’ boundaries, of which I showed many
      examples in the previous article. My particular approach is
      especially interested in cases where the sequence of coordinates
      is eventually periodic, which means that I often represent an
      infinite-order supertile by describing
just
the
      repeating section of its coordinates, ignoring the initial part
      (which just describes whereabouts
in
that supertile you
      are). For example, in the previous article
      I
showed a
      picture of
the (E, 6)(G, 2) supertile in the 10-hex hats
      system – and also the (G, 2)(E, 6) one, which is not the same
      one, because they differ in whether the (E, 6) coordinates
      appear in the even or odd positions.
On the other hand, not every substitution system makes it
      possible to construct a transducer. The hat HTPF algorithm in
      particular does not – but a different substitution system for
      the hat tiling, based on 10 different hexagonal metatiles found
      by Brad Klee and Bowen Ping, does.
Transducers are constructed from a simpler kind of state
      machine that I call an ‘adjacency recogniser’. This
      consumes
two
input coordinate strings, by taking one
      symbol at a time from each one (as if they were combined by
      Python
zip()
), and tells you
whether
they
      represent neighbouring tiles. The initial pair of symbols,
      giving the types of the two actual tiles, is augmented with a
      pair of indices specifying an
edge
of each tile, so
      that the question the machine is answering is ‘Is
this
edge of
this
tile adjacent to
that
edge
      of
that
tile?’.
For the hat HTPF system, it’s easy enough to make an adjacency
      recogniser, but the process that turns one into a finite-state
      transducer fails, because it doesn’t stop after finitely many
      states. But some tilings are even difficult to construct an
      adjacency recogniser for in the first place.
Improved algorithms
At the end of my previous article, I mentioned a couple of
      things I’d still like to improve on in my algorithmic
      techniques. I wanted a better technique for building the
      ‘adjacency recogniser’ state machines, capable of handling
      extra-difficult spurs and disconnectedness which my previous
      algorithms struggled with. I also had an untested idea about a
      ‘coordinate finder’ algorithm, which could walk around an
      unannotated patch of tiling and figure out what combinatorial
      coordinates might represent it, by refining a state machine
      every time it stepped between two tiles.
I’m pleased to say that I’ve successfully managed both of
      those! So I’ll start by presenting them.
Improved adjacency recogniser
The way I presented adjacency recognisers in
      the
previous
      article
, each state of the machine (apart
      from
START
) represented a pair of tile
      types, and a pair of edges along which those tiles were
      adjacent. From there, you could figure out whether to accept an
      input symbol giving you each tile’s relationship to its
      supertile, and if so, how the supertiles would have to be
      adjacent in turn.
That setup was nice and simple. You could draw an adjacency
      recogniser for a simple substitution system (like the ones for
      Penrose half-tile triangles) by hand on paper, if you wanted to.
      And you could look at the output of the generation code and
      check by eye whether you thought it looked sensible.
But that technique is fundamentally not powerful enough to
      handle
this
substitution system for entire Penrose
      tiles, mentioned at the end of the previous article:
Substitution rules for Penrose P2 whole kites and darts
In this system, suppose you’re told that edge #3 of a kite is
      supposed to join to edge #1 of a dart, and then you find out
      that the kite is #1 of a larger kite, and the dart is #2 of a
      larger kite. What happens?
Difficult case for the old adjacency recogniser
The two supertiles
don’t
share any edge. Instead, they
      only join at a corner. The previous system has no way to
      represent that state of affairs – but it certainly is a legal
      thing that can happen in a P2 tiling!
So the previous adjacency-recogniser scheme is too limited.
      It’s not enough just to have states that represent a pair of
      tiles sharing an edge. We also need to be able to represent
      situations like this one, in which the tiles touch at a vertex,
      with some particular angle between them.
I tried rewriting the code that generates adjacency recognisers
      so that its state descriptions were in this form. I got it
      working on at least one tiling, but
very
slowly: partly
      because it was relying on Sage’s algebraic number system to
      calculate vertex coordinates without rounding error, and mostly
      because there are a lot of
possible
states of this
      type, but
most
of them are dead ends, in the sense that
      they’ll never lead to an accepting state. Exploring all the dead
      ends was taking most of the time.
Then I had a much better idea.
Building a state machine via equivalence relations
Each symbol in a tile’s coordinate string, after the initial
      one, indicates what its supertile type is, and which child of
      that supertile the original tile was. This implies a
      fixed
geometric relationship
between the tile and its
      supertile.
And a particular symbol
pair
, as received by the
      adjacency recogniser, transforms the geometric relationship
      between its input tiles into a geometric relationship between
      its output tiles, in a fixed way. So if two states of the
      adjacency recogniser are ‘equivalent’ in the sense that they
      represent the same two tiles in the same relative position and
      orientation, and both states make a transition on the same
      symbol pair, then the two destination states are also
      equivalent. Conversely, two states that make
      transitions
to
equivalent states on the same symbol
      pair must also be equivalent.
This leads to a purely symbolic algorithm for constructing a
      state machine, as follows:
Use the recursive coordinate transition algorithm to
        generate a corpus of finitely long pairs of coordinate strings
        that are adjacent.
Rearrange these into strings of symbol pairs, i.e. into
        input strings which the adjacency recogniser should
        accept.
Make a nondeterministic state machine that
        matches
only
those strings. For each input
        string
S
, add a path of transitions
        from
START
to the
        appropriate
ACCEPT
(tile type) state
        for
S
, via its own collection of intermediate states
        not used for anything else, with the transitions labelled with
        each symbol of
S
in turn.
Now find equivalences between the states of this machine,
        according to these two rules:
If two states
s
,
t
have transitions on the
            same symbol pair to states
u
,
v
respectively,
            and
s
,
t
are already known to be equivalent,
            then mark
u
,
v
as equivalent too. (In
            particular, if
s
,
t
are actually
            the
same
state, this will be true. So the algorithm
            begins by merging a lot of pairs of states that are both
            reachable from
START
by the same
            symbol pair.)
Conversely, if the
destination
states
u
,
v
of the two transitions are already
            equivalent, or are the same state (such as
            an
ACCEPT
state), then
            mark
s
,
t
as equivalent.
After step 3 of this procedure, we have an adjacency recogniser
      that is
sound
(it won’t accept any invalid input), but
      very incomplete: it won’t accept any input that wasn’t in our
      finite input corpus. But step 4, merging states, enables it to
      recognise a much larger set of strings, including strings longer
      than any in the input corpus – and by the geometric argument
      above, it preserves soundness.
That’s a bit abstract, so I’ll show a simplified example. In
      this example I’ll temporarily forget the detail that input
      symbols are pairs of two-part coordinates, and pretend our state
      machine is dealing with simple letters of the alphabet; I’ll
      also forget that an adjacency recogniser needs multiple
      accepting states (one for each tile type), and pretend we have
      just one.
I’ll also imagine that our input corpus, showing strings that
      must be accepted by the machine, consists of just
two
strings: “
abc
” and “
abdbc
”.
In this simplified situation, step 3 would build a state
      machine looking like this:
Now step 4 finds equivalences:
States 1 and 3 are both reached
        from
START
on the same
        symbol
a
, so we mark them as equivalent.
Now, states 2 and 4 are reached from the equivalent states 1
        and 3 on the same symbol
b
, so we mark those as
        equivalent too.
States 2 and 6 both transition
to
the same
        state
ACCEPT
on the same
        symbol
c
, so we mark them as equivalent.
And now, states 1 and 5 transition to equivalent states 2
        and 6 on the same symbol
b
, so we mark those as
        equivalent.
Now we’ve merged all the states we can, and we have four
      equivalence classes left:
START
,
      {1, 3, 5}, {2, 4, 6}, and
ACCEPT
. If we
      condense each of those classes into a single state in the
      diagram, then the transition from state 4 to 5 on
      symbol
d
becomes a
backward
edge – so we get
      this:
To begin with, this state machine has become deterministic,
      because the equivalence-finding procedure merged any pair of
      states that were reached by the same transition from the same
      previous state.
But also, we can see from this diagram that the machine
      doesn’t
just
match “
abc
” and “
abdbc
” any
      more. Now it also matches “
abdbdbc
”, “
abdbdbdbc
”,
      and every longer string with more repetitions of
bdbdbd
in the middle. We’ve extended the input corpus, sort of ‘by
      analogy’, to match an infinite set of strings that it didn’t
      mention explicitly.
Iterating to completeness
That’s the simplified example. Now we return to the original
      application of building an adjacency recogniser.
In this case, our input corpus consists of a finite set of
      pairs of coordinate strings describing adjacent tiles. After we
      do the Step 4 merging operation, we’ve extended our state
      machine to match an
infinite
set of pairs of coordinate
      strings.
But have we got all of them? It will depend on the input corpus
      – and if the corpus isn’t big enough, we can try again with a
      bigger one.
As the
initial
input to this algorithm, we provide all
      the pairs of strings that the recursive algorithm is able to
      generate without needing to recurse beyond some fixed
      depth
k
– that is, pairs of input and output strings
      with
length
up to
k
. We start by
      choosing
k
reasonably small, so that we can make some
      progress quickly. So it’s likely that the initial step won’t
      produce a complete recogniser.
Next, we check if it
is
complete, using the technique
      described
      in
the
        previous article
: make its Cartesian product with the much
      simpler state machine that represents all legal coordinate
      strings, and search that product machine to see if it contains
      any state where the ‘legal input’ machine has a transition but
      the adjacency recogniser doesn’t.
If it’s not complete, we go back to step 1 of the procedure
      above, using a larger
k
, so that some longer pairs of
      strings appear in the input corpus.
We don’t need to start from scratch in each iteration. We can
      keep all the states and equivalences we’ve already generated; we
      only need to generate some
extra
strings to add to the
      input corpus, and some extra states. Then we don’t need to redo
      any of the existing work.
Also, we don’t need to generate
all
input strings of
      the new longer length. Many of them will just be extensions of
      shorter strings we already saw. So we can remember each input
      string where the recursive algorithm went too deep on the
      previous iteration, and use those as the starting points to
      generate strings for the next iteration. That way we avoid
      redoing any work.
So now we just keep on iterating, increasing
k
each
      time, until the completeness check passes.
Is there a
guarantee
that this will terminate? Not
      that I know of. Outside the context of adjacency recognisers,
      it’s certainly possible to think of cases in which the
      equivalence-class algorithm won’t terminate.
But in
every
case I’ve tried involving an actual
      tiling, this technique has terminated, and delivered a complete
      and fully usable adjacency recogniser. It works for all the
      tilings that the previous system was able to handle; it works
      for the P2 whole-tiles system shown above; it works for the
      corresponding P3 system, which is even more difficult –
      see
below
. And it even works for the hat
      and Spectre H
7
/H
8
systems, which I didn’t
      mention in the previous article, and which are also too
      difficult for the old algorithm. I’ll discuss
      those
later
as well.
Evaluation
I’m really pleased with this technique!
The code is considerably
simpler
than my original
      algorithm, which needed to do a lot of detailed thinking about
      tile edges and vertices, and had special-case code for getting
      round spurs. And yet it handles a strict superset of tilings.
Despite being a geometrically inspired algorithm, it doesn’t
      actually have to think about
geometry
at any point: it
      never has to calculate any coordinates, or perform any geometric
      transformation. In particular, it makes no difference at all
      that the Spectre expansion systems reverse the handedness of
      everything. My previous attempt, computing all the geometry
      explicitly, needed a special case for that which negated all the
      rotations. This algorithm doesn’t even notice, and if it did
      notice, it wouldn’t care.
It’s also fast. It avoids
both
of the problems that
      made the explicitly geometric approach slow: it doesn’t do any
      calculation at all with numerical coordinates, and it never
      wastes time on exploring dead ends, because every state
      generated from its input corpus is pre-selected to have at least
      one possible path to an
ACCEPT
state. In
      fact it turns out to run faster even than my
original
adjacency recogniser construction, although not by much.
It handles spurs – even extra-difficult ones – without even
      having to know they were there. When we call the recursive
      algorithm to generate the input corpus,
that
deals with
      spurs, by recursing an extra time every time it has to cross
      one. But once we have an input corpus, that work is done, and
      all we have to do in
this
algorithm is to make a
      machine that matches whatever the resulting patterns in the
      input strings were – without knowing or caring whether any spur
      traversals were involved in
generating
the input
      strings. It ‘just works’, almost like magic!
A measure of how well it works is that I don’t
      even
know
how far it ended up having to go to handle
      the difficult tilings. We can see from the above example that in
      the P2 whole-tiles system you can have pairs of tiles meeting
      only at a vertex. Maybe that means there are even worse cases in
      which the geometric relationship between two tiles
      doesn’t
even
involve them meeting at a vertex, but
      somehow, still have a path back to an accepting state?
I
        have no idea!
If there are any cases like that, then this
      algorithm handled them without needing any special code, and I
      never even had to find out
whether
that’s a thing that
      can happen.
I feel as if this general algorithm ought to have other uses!
      But I haven’t thought of one yet.
Coordinate finder
In the previous article
      I
mentioned
another possible application for a transducer: instead of using
      it to convert an input string of coordinates into an output
      patch of tiles, you could run it in reverse, if you already had
      a patch of tiles and wanted to find some coordinates consistent
      with them.
That seemed like a fairly theoretical sort of possibility at
      the time. Yes, you
might
see a patch of Penrose tiling
      in a book and have some reason to need to reproduce it in a
      coordinate-based system – but it’s not exactly
likely
.
      I was curious to try the idea out to see if it worked, but I
      didn’t really expect it to be useful for anything.
But I was wrong! Not long after I published the previous
      article, I was presented with just this problem, because
      somebody had generated a Spectre patch of particular interest
      via a totally different technique, and we wanted to find its
      coordinates. (I’ll discuss the patch in question
later
.) So I wrote the
      coordinate-finder and tried it out.
It worked almost exactly the way I’d imagined, except for one
      detail I got wrong when I suggested it in the previous article:
      you don’t actually need a
transducer
to do this job. It
      turned out actually easier to use the adjacency recogniser
      directly, because that delivers exactly one output symbol per
      state transition, which was more convenient than the way a
      transducer delivers output in irregular lumps, sometimes not
      delivering a symbol at all and sometimes more than one. The
      tradeoff is that the adjacency recogniser isn’t deterministic –
      sometimes it can deliver multiple possibilities for the next
      symbol – but in this case, where we wanted to keep track of all
      the possibilities anyway, that was just fine.
So the coordinate-finder I ended up with works with NFAs rather
      than DFAs, and depends only on an adjacency recogniser, not a
      transducer. This is actually better, because it means you can
      still use it for substitution systems that don’t admit a
      transducer!
How the coordinate finder works
The basic idea of the coordinate finder is: you’re sitting on a
      particular tile of your input patch of tiling, and you have an
      NFA representing
all
the possible infinite coordinate
      strings that might describe that tile. Initially, you know
      nothing except the shape of that one tile – so your starting NFA
      simply represents
all legal coordinate strings
that
      describe a tile of the appropriate shape.
Now you walk around the patch by stepping from one tile to a
      neighbour. At each stage, you build a new NFA that describes all
      the possible coordinate strings for the
destination
tile, consistent with whatever you knew about its neighbour that
      you just came from, and the way in which those tiles are
      connected to each other. This is done by making the Cartesian
      product of the previous NFA with the adjacency recogniser;
      searching that combined state machine to find the subset of
      states in which the NFA is consistent with one side of the input
      to the adjacency recogniser; and using the
other
side
      of the adjacency recogniser’s input in those states to generate
      the output NFA.
So, as you walk around the tiling, your NFA changes in two
      ways. At every step it describes the possible coordinates of the
      tile you’re currently sitting on, so as you walk around, it
      changes to reflect a different actual tile. But also, it
      ‘remembers’ the history of every tile it’s already visited, so as
      you walk around, it becomes more and more constrained, due to the
      need to stay consistent with all that history.
So now you just have the problem of walking around your entire
      patch of tiling, visiting every tile so as to collect as much
      information as you can, and finally returning to whichever tile
      you actually wanted to know the coordinates of. After you’ve
      done that, the NFA will show you possible coordinates for the
      tile you finished on, that are consistent with everything you
      visited on your walk.
I considered finding an efficient route around the patch using
      a sophisticated approach like an approximate TSP solver, but it
      wasn’t necessary: this algorithm runs quickly enough that it
      probably would have wasted
more
time to try to plot an
      optimal route to save building a few NFAs.
So instead I did the simplest possible thing: do a depth-first
      search over the input patch of tiling to make a spanning tree of
      it, and then your route around the patch is simply to traverse
      that tree starting and ending at the root. This can’t take more
      than twice the optimal number of steps, and that’s fast
      enough.
(I considered the possibility that the algorithm might need to
      traverse every
edge
of the tiling patch, but it doesn’t
      seem to have been needed: visiting every tile has worked fine
      for me so far.)
Output modes
As I’ve described it, the output you get from this coordinate
      finder is an NFA – a non-deterministic state machine – which
      describes all the possible coordinate sequences consistent with
      your input patch of tiling. There will be infinitely many
      possible sequences, because in tilings based on hierarchical
      substitution any finite patch of tiles shows up infinitely often
      all over the place. Also, each individual sequence is infinitely
      long in its own right. So the only way to show
all
the
      possibilities, in full, in finite space, is to exhibit a finite
      state machine that generates them.
A nondeterministic state machine isn’t very readable; it
      improves readability to determinise it first, using the standard
      NFA→DFA subset construction. That way, if the input tiling patch
      is large enough to leave only one possibility for the first
      (say) five coordinates of the output, you can see that at a
      glance, because each of the first five states of the machine has
      only one transition to the next. With the raw NFA you might have
      to explore lots of branches before you could be sure there was
      only one possibility.
Even so, a DFA is not the most readable thing. You’d like to be
      able to return an actual coordinate
string
! But, of
      course, the problem is that there are too many options to choose
      from.
One thing you could do would be to choose randomly. Generate an
      output patch of tiling using the ordinary recursive algorithm,
      making up coordinates lazily as if you were making
      a
random
patch – but keep track of your location in the
      output DFA, and whenever you make up the next coordinate, choose
      randomly from the options in that DFA. This would give you a
      random tiling which agrees with the input patch – and you could
      do it again with different random numbers, generating lots of
      random outputs
all
agreeing on the input patch.
Here I show an example of doing this. I manually retyped the
      details of the central decagon figure from the P2 “cartwheel
      pattern” that I showed
      in
the previous
        article’s appendix
; then I fed it to the coordinate finder,
      and got it to generate five different random patterns consistent
      with the resulting state machine.
Five random extensions of Batman in a decagon
But in the case where I first used this algorithm, I didn’t
      want a
random
extension of the input patch. I had
      reason to believe that the input patch was likely to correspond
      to a simple and eventually periodic infinite coordinate string,
      like many of the examples in the previous article – and I was
      trying to recover
that
string.
There will be lots of different eventually periodic coordinates
      that are consistent with any NFA of this kind. You only have to
      follow transitions at random, and at some point, when you’re in
      a state you’ve been in before, choose to start repeating your
      past route forever. And there are infinitely many choices you
      could make, because you don’t have to start repeating yourself
      the
first
time you return to a previous state – you
      could wander around for as long as you like first.
But if a large input patch ‘really’ corresponds to some
      particularly simple thing, like repeating the same single
      coordinate forever, then you’d be likely to get an output NFA in
      which the first (say) five coordinates were fixed; the last four
      of them were all the same; and repeating that final coordinate
      forever is permitted by the NFA. In that
      situation,
that
eventually periodic string is far more
      likely to be the true answer than any you’d find by choosing
      some other random repeating loop after the five fixed
      coordinates.
So I also wrote an output mode that would answer the question
      “What is the simplest eventually periodic coordinate string
      consistent with this NFA?”, where ‘simplest’ is defined as a
      combination of the length of the repeating string, and the
      length of initial segment until you reach the repeating part.
      This worked very well, and recovered the coordinates I
      wanted.
So, those are the three potentially useful outputs from the
      coordinate finder: a DFA that shows you
all
possibilities, randomised selection that gives you an arbitrary
      concrete example, and the specialist mode of ‘find the simplest
      repeating one’ which is suitable for the kind of highly
      symmetric and theoretically interesting patterns the previous
      article was focusing on.
Penrose tilings via whole-tile substitution
      systems
The improved adjacency recogniser algorithm can handle some
      substitution systems that the previous one couldn’t. Let’s look
      at two of them in particular, relating to Penrose tilings.
P2 whole tiles: ugly but practical
In a
previous section
I showed an example
      of a substitution system operating directly on P2 kites and
      darts, without having to cut them up into half-tile triangles
      first. This was one of the substitution systems that my previous
      algorithms couldn’t handle at all, but my improved algorithms
      can. So I now know how to build an adjacency recogniser for that
      system, and better still, it successfully generates a
      deterministic transducer.
Using this transducer to generate P2 tilings is convenient,
      because you don’t need a postprocessing step in which you expand
      each triangle back into its full tile and discard duplicates. If
      I wanted to recommend a practical tiling generation mechanism to
      someone now, for random patches of tiling
or
interesting symmetric ones with eventually periodic coordinates,
      I’d definitely pick this. The transducer is a tiny state machine
      (31 states); the algorithm never has to backtrack (whereas the
      recursive algorithm would if you used it with this system, due
      to the spur in the dart’s expansion); and it can directly
      generate the tiles you want as output.
However, the triangle-based system still has value when it
      comes to
understanding
Penrose tilings. The whole-tile
      system is practically convenient, but not nearly so illuminating.
In particular, Penrose tilings have a symmetry property, which
      is clearly shown in the triangle-based system: each triangle
      type has a mirror image, and the mirror image of a tiling is
      obtained by a simple transformation on its coordinates. But the
      whole-tile substitution system has to break that symmetry. As a
      result, it’s much harder to look at a coordinate string and have
      any idea whether you expect it to represent a symmetric instance
      of the tiling, or to find its mirror image if it doesn’t.
The infinite-order supertile boundaries show the same
      asymmetry. Here’s the ‘cartwheel pattern’
      from
the previous
        article’s appendix
, regenerated using the whole-tile
      transducer, with the infinite boundary shown in a thick
      line:
The cartwheel pattern, with boundary derived from
        the whole-tile substitution system
What on earth is that boundary doing?! It’s weaving about all
      over the place, with apparently no relation at all to the
      ten-way near-symmetry structure of this pattern, and also no
      relation to the one line of
true
symmetry (the vertical
      line down the centre). It’s not even
rotationally
symmetric about the centre, or even nearly so.
If this pattern is drawn using the half-tile triangles, the
      infinite supertile boundary is a straight line, running
      vertically along the line of true symmetry. That makes logical
      sense; you can see
why
the line is there.
      But
this
boundary has no logic or usefulness at all.
      It’s absolutely unrelated to any structure you were interested
      in. And it’s not even pretty – on the contrary, it looks as if
      some vandal has scrawled an ugly jagged line across a beautiful
      pattern.
But as long as you
don’t
show the infinite supertile
      boundaries, this is a very convenient way to plot P2 tilings. So
      we’ll just leave it at that.
P3 whole tiles: practical
and
pretty!
Also in the previous article, I exhibited the following
      substitution system for the Penrose P3 rhomb tiling, again
      using the whole tiles instead of cutting them into two triangles:
Substitution rules for Penrose P3 whole rhombs
I wasn’t at all sure whether it would even be
possible
to make a finite-state adjacency recogniser for this system. I
      tried for a while using variations of my older techniques, and
      the kinds of problem I ran into made me start to doubt that it
      would ever work. An obvious oddity is that the expansion of the
      thin rhomb isn’t even
connected
, at least in the sense
      of tiles meeting edge-to-edge. Once you expand by several levels
      and look at how larger patches relate, worse problems show up,
      like multiple spurs running along the same line, with potential
      ambiguities about which one is on which side. It looked almost
      unmanageable, and I gave up on trying to make a state machine
      for it at all.
But my new equivalence-class based adjacency recogniser
      algorithm has no difficulty with it! Once I’d got it working on
      a simpler system, I test-ran it on this one, without much hope –
      and, completely to my surprise, it
just worked
. It
      generates a complete and correct adjacency recogniser, which
      also admits a deterministic transducer.
(I have no idea
how
it got round all the problems I
      had when I tried to do this by hand. But it did. One of the
      great things about the new algorithm is that it doesn’t make you
      think about those details at all!)
So, just as in the previous section: if you want a practical
      technique for generating P3 tilings, then a transducer
      constructed from this system is now my recommended one.
As in the P2 case, the asymmetry in this system makes it less
      useful for
understanding
than the symmetric half-tile
      triangles system I was using before. But here’s some better
      news. Unlike that ugly lumpy infinite supertile boundary we saw
      in the P2 case, the results of the asymmetry in this case
      are
really pretty!
When I successfully built a transducer for this system, my very
      first thought was: if the expansion of the dart isn’t connected
      (or rather, only vertex-connected), then what happens if we
      iterate expansion of the dart? What weird shape do you get if
      you take a dart, which is child #0 of a dart, which is child #0
      of a dart, … for ever?
This is exactly the kind of question that
      transducers answer without any difficulty. And I hope you’ll
      agree that the results are well worth the effort:
The (dart, 0) supertile (in blue), with three
        neighbouring supertiles
That’s both intriguing and lovely! The infinite supertile
      containing the original dart is shown in blue. When I generated
      the whole image, it turns out to share the plane with three
      other different infinite-order supertiles, shown here in red,
      orange and yellow.
All four supertiles are disconnected if you consider only
      edge-to-edge adjacency of rhombs, although it looks as if
      they’re all connected vertex-wise. (I haven’t done the maths to
      prove whether or not this is true all the way out to infinity;
      I’m only going by what I see in this picture. But it looks very
      plausible to me.)
The blue supertile seems to be forming a kind of spiral. The
      connected regions get larger and larger as you spiral outwards,
      and smaller as you spiral inwards. At the inner end of the
      spiral, the single blue thin rhomb at the very centre of the
      image is the starting one.
The other three supertiles all have coordinates with period 3.
      One of them is (thin, 1)(thick, 0)(thick, 1) – that is, a thin
      rhomb which is child #0 of a thick, which is child #1 of another
      thick, which is child #1 of a thin, going on for ever. The other
      two are cyclic rotations of the same pattern (which you’d
      expect, since the pattern as a whole must be invariant under a
      single expansion).
I’m particularly pleased that these disconnected infinite
      supertiles
worked
, without confusing the transducer
      algorithm! That’s another thing I wouldn’t have been confident
      predicting in advance. But it’s all fine – as the drawing
      algorithm transitions into one of those isolated blue rhombs and
      out the other side, the transducer is quite happy to say ‘ok,
      you’ve left
this
infinite supertile and gone
      into
that
one’ on the first transition, and ‘… fine,
      whatever, you’re back in the first one again’ on the second, and
      nothing goes wrong. It’s really satisfying when your software
      effortlessly negotiates a special case that you hadn’t predicted
      and didn’t write any extra code to account for!
I mentioned in the previous section that these whole-tile
      substitution systems are asymmetric. So another question that
      sprang to my mind was: what would the mirror image of this
      tiling look like?
There are several ways to find that out. One approach is to
      convert to triangles and back. The triangle-based coordinates of
      one end of the central rhomb above are CCCC…, which implies that
      the coordinates of its mirror image must be DDDD…. (See what I
      mean about it being easy to work with symmetry in the triangle
      representation?) From there we could laboriously convert back
      into the whole-tile substitution system.
(Incidentally, in the triangles system, the coordinates CCCC…
      don’t lead to any infinite supertile boundary
at all
–
      there’s just one trivial infinite supertile, covering the whole
      plane.)
But an easier, if slightly cheating, approach is to reuse
      our
coordinate finder
! I
      generated a graph-theoretic description of the picture above,
      and then just rewrote all the edge indices in every description
      of an adjacency between tiles, so that they described the
      mirror-image edge. Then I fed that to the coordinate finder, and
      asked it for the simplest eventually periodic coordinate string
      matching the input patch. The input patch was big enough to be
      confident of the result.
The result is shown below,
in mirror image
. That is: I
      found the coordinates describing the mirror image of the above
      tiling, and then I reflected it again, so that
      it
matches
the above tiling. That way, you can flick
      back and forth between the two images using the radio buttons
      below, and see for yourself that all the actual rhombs are the
      same, and only the supertile structure has changed.
An equivalent way of describing this is: suppose that instead
      of finding the coordinates of the mirror-image tiling in the
      same substitution system, I had instead found the coordinates of
      the
same
tiling, under a P3 substitution system that is
      the mirror image of the one shown above.
Anyway, here’s the mirrored representation of the same
      tiling:
The same P3 tiling generated from reflected substitution systems
It’s different, and yet, it’s the same. Here, there are only
      two infinite supertiles, namely the two rotations of
      (thin, 1)(thick, 0). But you can see the same kinds of feature in
      the boundary between them; I think they’re spiralling outwards
      in the same sort of way, although all the details are different.
Finally, here are a couple more particularly pretty tilings.
      These are the two P3 tilings with the symmetry of a pentagon,
      which I showed in
      the
previous
        article
, having generated them using the triangle-based
      substitution system. In that system, the infinite supertile
      boundaries were straight lines along the axes of reflection
      symmetry. In this system, they resemble the boundaries above –
      only vertex-connected, and asymmetric under reflection. But the
      patterns as a whole must still be rotationally symmetric,
      because they consist of five copies of the
same
infinite supertile. So this time the not-quite-connected
      fractal-ish boundaries spiral around the origin in a symmetric
      way:
P3 tilings with five-way symmetry, showing supertiles of the whole-tile substitution
Since the five supertiles in each of these pictures all have
      the same coordinates as each other, it was a challenge to find a
      way to colour them differently when generating these pictures!
      The trick is to think about directions. We assign a direction to
      each tile type by drawing an imaginary arrow on it; then, each
      (parent tile, child index) symbol in a coordinate string
      indicates a particular relationship between the arrow directions
      of the child and parent tiles. So you can start from the
      coordinates of any single tile in this picture, and determine
      the orientation of all of its supertiles. Every tile has an
      eventually periodic coordinate string, so sooner or later you
      reach the repeating section; after that point the sequence of
      orientations must repeat with period dividing 10, because the
      supertile coordinates themselves have period 2 and there are 10
      possible orientations. So you can distinguish the supertiles by
      asking about the limiting orientation of the supertiles whose
      orders are multiples of 10.
The H
7
/H
8
systems for hats and
      Spectres
Here’s another important pair of substitution systems which I
      didn’t mention in the previous article.
In the paper introducing the hat tiling, there’s a diagram of a
      substitution system with only
two
types of metatile,
      rather than the four in the HTPF system (or the ten of Brad Klee
      and Bowen Ping’s hexagons):
Substitution rules for a hat + reflected hat to H
7
, and a single hat to H
8
The two expanded clusters of hats are labelled H
7
and H
8
, because they contain 7 and 8 hats
      respectively.
When I wrote the previous article, I didn’t mention this
      system. I’d seen it in the paper, but I’d never been able to
      make it work in my software at all, so I had nothing useful to
      say about it. I don’t just mean that my underpowered adjacency
      recogniser algorithm couldn’t handle it (although that would
      certainly have been true); I mean I couldn’t even make the
      simpler recursive algorithm work with it, because I
      couldn’t
describe
the system precisely enough to tell
      the code how to match up the edges. Which parts of the
      complicated edges of those clusters correspond to which edges of
      the hats they were expanded from? I tried quite hard to figure
      it out, but never managed it.
After I published the previous article, Pieter Mostert
      discussed it with me on Mastodon, and kindly provided the hint I
      was missing.
Matching up the edges
The first secret is to start by assigning two properties to
      each edge of the hat tile: a colour (shown here as either green
      or yellow), and an orientation (shown as an arrow on the edge,
      indicating which end is its ‘front’ and which its ‘back’).
      Orientations simply alternate forward and backward as you go
      round the tile; colours are assigned based on whether the edge’s
      direction is an odd or even multiple of 30°. This also means
      that the green edges are the shorter ones and the yellow edges
      are longer, because it’s the nature of the hat tiling that those
      two properties go together – all the short edges are multiples
      of 60° apart from each other, and the same for the long
      edges.
A hat, with colours and orientations marked on its edges
(I’ve drawn double arrows on the yellow edges, for an extra
      visual distinction.)
Once you’ve done that, the second secret is to expand each
      green edge consistently to a path of three edges, and each
      yellow edge to a path of five, in the patterns shown below. The
      arrow on the single input edge shows which way round the pattern
      of output edges goes. If the input edge is rotated, then the
      output edges are rotated by the same amount.
The rules for expanding green and yellow hat edges
(This looks silly because the expanded edges don’t go in
      remotely the same direction as the originals, or even as each
      other! But it will all work out, you’ll see.)
Next, we start with the outline of an ordinary hat tile, and
      transform it by mapping each edge in turn through this
      transformation. The region enclosed by the resulting outline is
      a complicated shape which – as if by magic – just happens to be
      tileable with eight hats!
Expansion of a hat outline, one edge at a time
(If you’re wondering where those extremely weird and
      non-intuitive expansion rules came from, or why they work, I’m
      sorry to say that I have no real idea! I worked them out by
      starting from a different pair of edge expansions that Pieter
      Mostert described for a related tiling system, but that was
      routine algebra – the difficult part had already been done.
      Somebody somewhere did something extremely clever to come up
      with this, but it definitely wasn’t me. I tried, and
      failed!)
So that’s how you match up the edges of the original hat to the
      edges of the expansion: each hat edge maps to the 3 or 5 edges
      it was expanded into. If you’re expanding a tiling in which
      edge
i
of hat
H
and edge
j
of hat
K
coincide, then those edges must have the same type, and so they
      expand into the same sequence of 3 or 5 edges when each hat is
      turned into one of these patches. And then the rule is that the
      two expanded patches are placed so that the sequences of edges
      expanded from edges
i
and
j
also coincide.
In fact, this is generally the way the edges work
      in
all
these tiling systems – the edges of the tiles
      have various types, with or without directions, and each edge
      type expands consistently to the same pattern of output edges.
      It’s just that this system is particularly convoluted and
      non-obvious.
You can see that at one point in the diagram above, the path of
      output edges doubled back on itself, creating a zero-width spur.
      That too is normal – it’s the same way that spurs are created in
      the other systems that have them.
But we’re only half done. What about the other hat cluster, the
      H
7
?
To answer that, I’ll start by showing what happens if you apply
      the same mapping to the
reflected
version of the hat:
Expansion of a reflected hat outline, one edge at a time
This procedure doubles back on itself a lot more than the
      previous one. Why’s that? Because the expansions of the green
      and yellow edges are set up so that when the input edges meet at
      a right angle with the original arrows both pointing toward the
      meeting point, the two output expansions either meet with the
      endmost arrows pointing towards each other (creating a
      double-length green edge with two inward arrows), or
      pointing in the
same
direction (causing the outline to
      double back), depending on which way the right angle goes. And
      in the hat outline, one direction of right angle happens much
      more often than the other. So expanding a normal hat gives
      you
mostly
straight edge segments, and only one
      doubling-back; expanding a reflected hat, where all the right
      angles reverse, it’s the other way round.
After you discount all those doublings-back, it looks as if the
      reflected hat has expanded into a single unreflected hat. But
      it’s stranger than that. The output outline has gone round the
      hat
the wrong way
– on the left-hand side we went
      anticlockwise, and on the right-hand side, clockwise. This
      indicates that the reflected hat has expanded into a
      true
anti-hat
: it
cancels out
a hat-shaped
      piece from whatever outline you combine it with!
So, when we combine a normal hat with a reflected one, the
      expanded outlines combine too, giving the outline of an
      H
8
cluster, composed with a reversed outline that
      cancels one of its hats. That’s where we get the H
7
outline from.
(It doesn’t matter whether the two hat outlines are
      traversed
in full
, going back and forth along the line
      separating them, or whether we just trace round the outside of
      the overall shape. If the input outline doubles back, then the
      output outline will too, so it makes no difference to the final
      shape.)
Expansion of a double-hat outline, one edge at a time
In this expansion there are some even stranger spurs. Many of
      the previous substitution systems I’ve shown have spurs
      poking
out
from the expansion of a tile, but this is
      the first that has a spur poking
inwards
. Even more
      confusingly, part of the actual outline is traversed three times
      – forwards in step 12 of the above animation, backwards in step
      14, and forwards again in step 15. I find it easiest to think of
      that as a spur that just happens to lie
along
the
      boundary!
I made one arbitrary choice in doing this: there are two
      possibilities for
which
neighbour of the reflected hat
      you combine with it. The one above is from the hat paper, but
      making the other choice also works, and gives you this different
      outline:
Expansion of the alternative double-hat outline, one edge at a time
Doing the same for Spectres
There’s a similar system for Spectres, shown in Figure 2.1 of
      the Spectre paper. It works almost exactly the same way as the
      hat one we’ve just seen – the two tilings are closely enough
      related that you can derive one of these transformations from
      the other by group theory.
We begin in the same way, by assigning each edge of a Spectre a
      colour based on its direction, and an orientation alternating
      around the tile edge. But for Spectres, that means there are two
      classes of tile, because the majority of Spectres in a tiling
      are at angles that are a multiple of 60°, but a few of them are
      rotated by 30° compared to the rest. In this labelling system,
      that means all the edges swap colours:
The common Spectre (left) and skew one (right), with colours and orientations
In this system, the two colours of edge don’t correspond to
      different
lengths
: the transformation that turns a hat
      into a Spectre is precisely to make all the edges the same
      length. But the directions of the edges still correspond to the
      two colours.
The edge expansion rules are similar to the previous pair, but
      not quite the same. In particular, this time it’s the green edge
      that expands to five sub-edges, and the yellow to only
      three:
The rules for expanding green and yellow Spectre edges
Using these rules, a single Spectre in the common orientation
      expands to a region that can be tiled with Spectres, very like
      the one for hats:
Expansion of a Spectre outline, one edge at a time
There are two differences between this and the hats version.
      Firstly, it takes nine Spectres to tile the output cluster, not
      eight. But also, the Spectres on the right
      are
reflected
, compared to the one on the left! This
      is a consequence of a fact we’ve already seen in other Spectre
      expansion systems: each time you expand a Spectre tiling, it
      reflects the whole plane. You have to expand an even number of
      times to get back to the same way round you started.
The rest of the setup works analogously to hats. If we expand
      the skew type of Spectre, which has the green and yellow edge
      types swapped, then the expansion generates a Spectre in the
      ordinary orientation (though again reflected), but it traces the
      boundary in the opposite direction to the input. So, just as
      with the hats, the unusual kind of input Spectre expands to
      an
anti-Spectre
which cancels something from another
      expansion:
Expansion of a skew Spectre, one edge at a time
Finally, to avoid this awkward anti-tile in the resulting
      substitution system, we combine the skew Spectre with one of its
      neighbours, to create the symmetric double-tile described in the
      Spectre paper as a ‘Mystic’, and expand
that
via the
      same rules, to generate a patch with 8 rather than 9 output
      Spectres:
Expansion of the Mystic, one edge at a time
Just as in the hat version, there’s an arbitrary choice of
      which neighbour you fuse the skew Spectre with. The above
      version is from the paper, but again, the other version works
      too if you prefer it. The two fused Spectres still have the same
      overall shape as the Mystic, but it’s not the
true
Mystic, as endorsed by the discoverers – you can tell, because
      its orientation is off by 30° and all its edges are the wrong
      colour. Perhaps we should call this combination a
      ‘Charlatan’?
Expansion of the Charlatan, one edge at a time
What’s the point of all this?
I’ve described these two substitution systems in great detail
      for several reasons. Firstly, just because this information
      about the edge mappings is useful, and wasn’t available anywhere
      else obvious; it took me some effort to derive this even with
      hints, and having done so, I should share the results!
Secondly, as I mentioned above, this is also quite a good
      illustration of how these substitution systems
in
      general
work, when it comes to figuring out how the edges
      of tile expansions connect together. I didn’t bother to go into
      all the details in the previous articles in this series, but the
      general setup of
all
the substitution systems I’ve
      dealt with – with one exception – involves the same notion of
      tile edges having both
types
and
orientations
,
      so that two edges can only connect if they have the same type
      and orientation. (That is, the orientations match in the sense
      that the arrows go the same way along the edge where the tiles
      meet – but that means the orientations are opposite, from the
      point of view of walking in a consistent direction around each
      tile’s boundary, say anticlockwise.) Then each edge type expands
      in a consistent way to a sequence of other edges, so that the
      expansion of any single tile is made by expanding its outline
      and then filling in tiles in the interior of the resulting
      region, so that the edge types inside the region match the edge
      types generated by expanding the boundary.
In both P2 and P3 Penrose tilings, the edge types and
      orientations correspond exactly to the matching rules that
      prohibit the periodic tilings you’d be able to make easily if
      you treated the tiles as plain quadrilaterals. There are two
      edge types in each case; in P2 they correspond to the two
      different lengths of tile edge, but in P3, where all the edge
      lengths are the same, they’re selected in a less obvious
      way.
Penrose tiles with arrows showing their matching rules
In the triangle-based substitution systems I’ve been using for
      those tilings in previous articles, we introduce two extra edge
      types when we cut each tile down the middle. Each of those edge
      types is unique, enforcing that the triangles
must
join
      back together in a way that makes full kites, darts or
      rhombs.
Penrose half-tile triangles with arrows showing their matching rules
And when you expand each triangle into smaller triangles, each
      edge type maps consistently to the same sequence of other edge
      types, wherever it appears. The same is true for the whole-tile
      systems I’ve shown in this article; the only difference is that
      in the triangle-based mapping the image of each edge is a
      straight line, whereas in the whole-tile systems, the image of
      each edge involves output edges with angles between them. In
      fact
most
of these systems involve angles; the Penrose
      triangle systems are the only ones I know simple enough not to
      need them.
The Spectre paper, when it presents the 9-hex substitution
      system, gives an explicit labelling of eight different edge
      types for the hexagons. (One of them is unusual in not having an
      orientation, meaning that its expansion has to be 180°
      rotationally symmetric.)
      In
my own presentation
        of the system
I showed those edge types as jigsaw-piece
      distortions of the hexagon edges. I didn’t show the details of
      how the expansions were worked out, but again, the complicated
      outline of each expansion is obtained by mapping each
      edge
type
consistently to the same pattern of output
      edge types, with the same angles between them – and there’s one
      rule for mapping hexagons to another layer of hexagons, and a
      different one for the final mapping of hexagons to Spectres.
The one exception, of a substitution system that doesn’t have a
      mapping of edge types at all, is the
overlapping
version of the HTPF system for hats. That doesn’t need one,
      because it matches up adjacent tile expansions in a completely
      different way, by identifying the overlapping parts with each
      other! But the
non
-overlapping version of HTPF has a
      system of exactly the same kind again, which I luckily didn’t
      have to work out for myself, because I found an exposition of it
      in a paper
      (
referenced from
        the previous article
).
A third reason why I wanted to present these
      H
7
/H
8
style systems for hats and Spectres
      is that, in some sense, they’re as close as you can practically
      get to the ‘true’ substitution system for these tilings, showing
      what’s ‘really’ going on.
What I think of as the ‘true’ substitution system for hat and
      Spectre tilings is the same as these systems,
      but
without
merging two tiles. That is:
Classify the tiles into two types, ‘normal’ and ‘weird’. For
        hats, the weird tiles are the reflected ones; for Spectres,
        the weird tiles are the skew ones, rotated 30° compared to the
        rest.
Each normal tile expands to a single weird tile, surrounded
        by a small cluster of normal tiles in a fixed layout, all
        rotated into whatever orientation the input tile had. (We’ve
        seen those layouts in the diagrams above: the 8-hat or
        9-Spectre clusters.)
These clusters
almost
always join up at the edges
        perfectly, no matter what orientations they connect in. The
        one exception is that wherever a weird tile appears in the
        input, two of the output clusters overlap in exactly one
        tile.
But then, each input weird tile expands to an
        output
anti-tile
, cancelling one of the overlapping
        pair. So you end up with the whole plane covered exactly
        once.
Why do I say this is the ‘true’ substitution system? For three
      reasons. Firstly, it operates directly on the
      actual
tiles
– the individual hats and Spectres –
      without needing an auxiliary system of metatiles. If somebody
      gave you a patch of hat or Spectre tiling without any coordinate
      labels, you could
directly
expand it into a larger
      patch by applying these rules, without needing to first figure
      out how the tiles grouped into your favourite kind of metatile.
      Secondly, this system also permits you to
reverse
the
      expansion process, generating the supertiles that would have
      expanded to the pattern you started with. And thirdly, it even
      gives rise to a
geometric
relationship between the
      coordinates of the input and output tiles – you don’t have to
      place each tile with reference to a previous one, you can
      directly calculate where each one must end up, even if you only
      know about its single parent tile. (However, for that to work
      you have to pretend the coordinates are four-dimensional, by
      treating the green and yellow edges as if they lived in separate
      copies of the complex plane – the vector space ℂ
2
.
      Then the geometric mapping is a linear transformation.)
But because of the anti-tiles, you can’t work directly with
      this system using my coordinate-based approach, which needs
      every tile to expand to a non-negative number of other tiles
      with nothing getting cancelled after the fact, so that each tile
      has a single sequence of coordinates. And the minimal
      modification to achieve that property is to merge each anti-tile
      into one of its neighbours, just as we see above.
There’s one final reason why these systems are interesting –
      and it’s important enough to have a section to itself.
Transducer construction failure
Once I understood the complicated edge mapping in these
      H
7
/H
8
substitution systems, I was able to
      represent them in my software in a way that at least allowed
      the
recursive
coordinate transition algorithm to handle
      them. Next, of course, I tried to feed them to my
      adjacency-recogniser and transducer construction code.
The
old
adjacency recogniser had no hope of dealing
      with them, because of the extra-difficult spurs. The inward spur
      is only a little bit tricky; the one aligned with the tile
      boundary is more awkward. But the really hard one is the one
      sticking out of the expansion of a single hat, or single
      Spectre. It doesn’t
look
that much harder than spurs
      we’ve already seen, in substitution systems I was handling
      successfully in the previous article. But it is harder, because
      it’s so long. In particular, it’s long enough to completely
      separate the expansions of two other adjacent tiles. That makes
      my
old spur-handling
      technique
fail, because that relied on a spur only
      reaching
part
of the way between two adjacent
      expansions – so the algorithm could slide sideways along the
      outline to find a pair of edges connecting the same two
      expansions
without
the spur being in the way. In this
      system, there isn’t always such an edge at all.
But then I developed my new equivalence-class based adjacency
      recogniser algorithm. And, just like everything else I’ve tried
      it on, the new algorithm has no trouble at all with these
      systems! It somehow finds a way to deal with those extra-awkward
      spurs, and it doesn’t bother me with the details.
So now I do have working adjacency recognisers for the hat
      H
7
/H
8
system, and the Spectre analogue.
      But neither of them allows construction of a transducer. The
      transducer-building algorithm fails in the same way that
      it
failed for
        the hat HTPF system
: you find that there are input
      coordinate strings which have more than one possible valid
      neighbour, so that a transducer might have to look ahead an
      unbounded distance to be certain of the next output symbol, and
      in some cases, would
never
know it.
When the hat HTPF transducer construction failed, I was able to
      extract information about the failure, and convert it into
      a
pair of very
        similar hat tilings
, in particular containing an infinite
      supertile boundary with one side the same, and the other side
      different. But I didn’t know of any such case in the Spectre
      tiling, because I only had the 9-hex substitution system to work
      with, and for that system, the transducer construction
      succeeded. In fact, when I first found that pair of hat tilings,
      I guessed that the hat
tiling itself
might have a
      fundamental ambiguity that the Spectre tiling didn’t. It was
      only later that I realised the difference might be an artefact
      of particular substitution systems.
And indeed it is, because now we have a transducer construction
      failure in a Spectre substitution system as well!
      There
are
ambiguous infinite supertile boundaries in
      the Spectre tiling – they just go away when you use the 9-hex
      substitution, in the same way that they went away for hats using
      Bowen Ping and Brad
      Klee’s
10-hex
        system
.
So, what next? Of course, we do the same thing as we did for
      hats: extract details of an ambiguous boundary from the
      transducer constructor’s failure diagnostics, find a way to
      generate the multiple possibilities for the far side of the
      ambiguous boundary, and see what they look like.
This time, we already have an unambiguous substitution system
      for Spectres – the standard 9-hex system. Better still, it
      matches up in a natural way to the layout of Spectres in the
      H
8
patch shown above (not surprisingly, since as I
      understand it that’s how the 9-hex system was derived in the
      first place). So I’ve been able to look at the coordinates of
      the ambiguous H
7
/H
8
situation, and
      directly work out what 9-hex coordinates correspond to each
      possibility.
In fact, there are
three
possibilities, in this case. Here they are:
The same shape of Spectre infinite supertile, with three different neighbours
Just as
      in
the
        hats case in the previous article
, when these alternative
      versions of the same supertile are generated using the
      unambiguous 9-hex system, you can see that the Spectre at the
      very corner of the invariant side changes its colour, showing
      that the 9-hex coordinates for the three options are all
      different. That’s what allows the 9-hex transducer to generate
      the rest of the plane differently each time.
Also, just as in that previous case, the rest of the plane
      isn’t always divided into the same set of other infinite
      supertiles. In one case there’s a single infinite supertile
      occupying the lower section of the picture; in the other two
      cases, there are two.
In fact, the other two cases are actually the
same
case, rotated by 60°. The (P, 7)(X, 7) and (X, 7)(P, 7) infinite
      supertiles actually appear alongside
each other
. So I’m
      really only showing
two
different tilings of the whole
      plane – it’s just that in one of them, there are two regions
      that are
both
the same shape as the (Y, 7) supertile in
      the first picture.
And we’re not out of surprises yet! If you were
really
paying attention to my previous article (and I wouldn’t at all
      blame you if you hadn’t been), you might
recognise
the
      supertile coordinates (Y, 7). They’re the very first example that
      I
originally
        started investigating
, and later, showed as
      the
proof-of-concept
        picture
demonstrating that I’d managed to get a transducer
      to cross infinite supertile boundaries in Spectre tilings
at
        all
.
In a
later
        section
of my previous article, I actually suggested this
      possibility, while talking about the way that the hat tiling
      apparently had more than one sequence of 10-hex coordinates
      that generated the same shape and layout of infinite
      supertile:
But wait – how do I know that’s not true for Spectres? For
        all I know, the example I originally found could be in exactly
        this situation, and I might just not have found the other
        sequence yet!
I didn’t particularly believe that was
actually
true –
      I just mentioned it as a theoretical possibility, because I knew
      I hadn’t actually proved it impossible. But it turns out that,
      without knowing it at the time, I’d hit the nail right on the
      head. My original example of a Spectre infinite supertile
      boundary
does
have another sequence of 9-hex
      coordinates that generates the same layout (in fact, two of
      them), and I
hadn’t
found the other ones yet!
Another thing to notice, in the picture above, is
      how
little
the tilings differ from each other, on the
      far side of the invariant boundary. The tilings you get by
      putting the (Y, 7) supertile and the (P, 7)(X, 7) in the same part
      of the plane differ by just one wiggly path of Spectres, in
      exactly the same way that my ambiguous pair of hat tilings
      differed by a single wiggly path of hats. So those are worth
      showing again by themselves, with the differing path shaded, and
      the rest of the colours weakened to make it more visible:
Two Spectre tilings differing along one wiggly path
        (plus varying supertile boundaries)
And if you match the (Y, 7) supertile and the (X, 7)(P, 7) against
      each other in the same way, the same is true again, only the
      path is a different shape! This time, it’s less wiggly – there
      are more Spectres in each bend:
Two Spectre tilings differing along a less wiggly
        path
What about the (P, 7)(X, 7) and (X, 7)(P, 7) infinite supertiles? I
      haven’t shown
those
against each other, but the fact
      that two rotations of the same pattern are very similar to each
      other is definitely significant too, and I’ll discuss it in
      a
later section
. Also, the fact
      that two infinite supertiles of the same shape fit exactly
      alongside each other has another consequence that I’ll discuss
      in
another later section
.
I said above that the transducer construction also failed for
      the hat H
7
/H
8
system. This time there’s
      nothing new to be found, though: the conflicting options I got
      from the diagnostics were all infinite supertiles that appear
      in
the
        previous article’s ambiguous case
. So this system and HTPF
      both fail in the same way, which is at least reassuringly
      consistent, even if it doesn’t lead to any interesting cases I
      hadn’t already known about!
Singular tilings
When I showed the
P3
      cartwheel pattern
at the end of the previous article, I
      didn’t talk about where it came from, because I didn’t know. I
      just knew that someone had already discovered it, and that it
      was famous enough to be on book covers.
But it seems very mysterious, at first glance. It’s clear
      enough why there would be
perfectly
symmetric Penrose
      tilings of the plane: I was able to construct those from first
      principles, just by thinking about the triangle view of the
      tiles, and the way axes of symmetry run along the triangle
      edges. But nothing in that view of the world predicts, or
      explains, why there should be a
nearly
symmetric tiling
      with breaks in the symmetry along particular lines. You couldn’t
      imagine it happening by pure coincidence – there must be some
      kind of underlying reason
why
such a tiling exists.
      What is that reason? What else does it give rise to?
Since then, I went and read Nicolas de Bruijn’s 1981 paper on
      the algebraic structure of P3 tilings (see
the
        links below
), which gives the answer to these questions. I
      don’t have space to expound the whole thing here, but I’ll show
      the key idea, and how it predicts the existence of the cartwheel
      pattern.
Then we’ll move on to looking at similar instances in the hat
      and Spectre tilings!
P3 tilings via de Bruijn’s pentagrids
De Bruijn’s paper defines a structure called a ‘pentagrid’.
      This consists of ruling a set of lines across the plane with
      unit spacing, and then doing the same thing again four more
      times, each at a 72° angle (one fifth of a whole turn) to the
      previous one.
An example pentagrid, and its construction from five sets of lines
The most natural way to do this is to make one line in each
      direction pass through the origin. But we want to be more
      general than that, so we’re going to permit the lines in each
      direction to be translated arbitrarily. That gives us an
      uncountable infinity of possible pentagrids, all different.
Each individual set of lines divides the plane into strips. In
      the diagrams above, I’ve assigned consecutive integer indexes to
      each strip, so that in the first set of lines the index
      increments by 1 every time you move one strip to the right, and
      in the other four sets, the same is true for the appropriate
      rotation of ‘right’. So when all the lines are superimposed, we
      end up with each
mesh
of the pentagrid – each small
      region of the plane bounded by grid lines – being assigned a
      tuple of 5 integer coordinates, which I’ll denote
      (
x
0
,
x
1
, …,
x
4
).
In the picture above, I’ve shown a few example sets of
      coordinates in particular meshes. (In a desktop browser, you can
      check them by leaving your mouse pointer on one of the marked
      regions, and using the keyboard to cycle the radio buttons
      through the individual sets of grid lines to confirm that it’s
      in the appropriately numbered strip in each case.) But I can’t
      show all the coordinates, because most of the regions are too
      small for the numbers to fit in the picture!
If you look at an intersection where two grid lines cross, how
      do the coordinates of the four surrounding meshes differ from
      each other? Three of the coordinates will be the same for all
      four meshes – the ones relating to the three directions of grid
      line that
don’t
meet at this intersection. Each of the
      remaining two coordinates will vary by 1 depending on which side
      of that line you’re on.
So, suppose we map each mesh to a point in the plane, by
      choosing five fixed vectors
      (
v
0
,
v
1
, …,
v
4
)
      to represent the five directions, and calculating the vector sum
      of
x
i
v
i
for
i
= 0, 1, …, 4. Then the four meshes surrounding a
      pentagrid intersection form a parallelogram, with its edges
      given by whichever two of the
v
i
correspond to the varying coordinates.
So, as long as there aren’t any points in the grid
      where
more
than two lines meet,
any pentagrid
        automatically constructs a tiling of the plane with
        parallelograms
. Moreover, there are exactly ten types of
      parallelogram, one for each pair of grid-line directions that
      can cross.
What vectors (
v
i
) should we choose?
      Any choices would give
some
kind of a tiling with
      parallelograms; if we make the vectors all the same length, then
      those parallelograms become rhombuses. But we’re aiming to end
      up at Penrose P3 tilings, so the right choice is to take
      each
v
i
to be a vector of the same
      length at angle
i
× 72°, i.e. perpendicular to the grid
      lines in the
i
th direction. Then our rhombuses will be
      the right shapes to be P3 tiles.
Converting the pentagrid into a rhombus tiling
Not every mesh maps to a point actually
in
the mesh.
      (Where it doesn’t, I’ve drawn an arrow in the diagram above,
      showing which mesh the point corresponds to.) It wouldn’t work
      if they did, because in places where all five directions of
      lines pass very close to each other, there are a lot
      of
tiny
meshes all together, and the points for those
      meshes must move apart quite a lot to make room for rhombuses.
      But if you choose the rhombus edge vectors to have length 2/5
      the grid spacing (as I’ve done here), then de Bruijn proves that
      the distance from each mesh to its tile vertex is bounded by a
      constant. So no vertex moves
too
far.
This is a tiling of the plane with rhombuses the same shape as
      the P3 tiles. But it’s not an actual Penrose tiling unless we
      can also show that it respects the matching rules – the arrows
      on the rhomb edges that I showed in
a
        previous section
.
It turns out that this isn’t guaranteed, for any old pentagrid.
      But it
is
guaranteed to work if the grid lines have
      been placed so as to give the following special property: if you
      choose a point in the plane and extend lines in each of the five
      cardinal directions until each one meets the nearest
      perpendicular grid line, then the lengths of those lines sum to
      an integer. (If this works for one point, it will work for any
      point of the plane.)
Distances that must sum to an integer
Given this extra condition, de Bruijn proves that it’s always
      possible to draw arrows on the rhombus edges in a consistent
      way, so that each rhombus is labelled correctly to be one of the
      P3 tiles, and they connect in the ways approved by the P3
      system. So we’ve constructed a Penrose tiling!
Assigning arrows to the tile edges
Singular pentagrids
If an intersection in a pentagrid has just two lines meeting
      there, then it gives rise to a rhombus in the tiling, because
      there are four meshes around that point, and each one makes a
      vertex of the tile corresponding to the point.
So, what happens if
more
than two pentagrid lines meet
      at an intersection? De Bruijn calls a pentagrid ‘singular’ if
      this happens anywhere (and ‘regular’ if it doesn’t).
In that case, you have more than four meshes around that
      intersection. Each one still generates a point in the output
      plane. So you expect to end up with a tile that has more than
      four sides: you don’t have a rhombus tiling any more, you have a
      tiling with rhombuses and some other things, like hexagons. In
      this picture, the vertical grid line down the centre has
      three-way meeting points all along it, and you can see that
      happening:
Tiling generated from a singular pentagrid
Obviously, this isn’t itself a Penrose tiling – some of the
      tiles aren’t even the right shape. But it’s very close to one.
      If this pentagrid still obeys the ‘distances sum to an integer’
      constraint, then all the tiles
other
than the hexagons
      are still the right shape, and de Bruijn’s construction for
      assigning arrows to the shapes still works. So we have a Penrose
      tiling of
most
of the plane, with only these hexagons
      missing.
But wait. Those hexagons look about the right shape to be
      filled with some Penrose tiles, don’t they?
This isn’t a coincidence. Imagine if you moved the vertical
      grid lines to the left by a tiny distance
ε
, and adjusted
      another set of grid lines by a similarly tiny amount to preserve
      the ‘sum to an integer’ constraint. The effect would be that in
      place of every 3-way intersection, you’d have three 2-way
      intersections very, very close together. And
those
give
      rise to perfectly good Penrose rhombs.
Perturbing the grid lines like this will change the overall
      structure of the tiling, because no matter how small you
      chose
ε
to be, if it’s greater than 0,
      then
somewhere
in the infinite plane that movement will
      cause 2-way intersections to cross over to the other side of a
      third grid line, so that the pattern of rhombs changes. But
      the smaller you make
ε
, the further away the first
      discrepancy will be. So you could imagine ‘taking the limit’
      as
ε
→ 0, to get a tiling that matches this one in all of
      the actual rhombs, and the
only
difference is that
      the hexagons have been filled in with more rhombs, completing
      the Penrose tiling.
But now, suppose instead of moving the vertical grid lines to
      the left by
ε
, you’d moved them to the right. Then the
      same thing would happen – but the hexagons would be filled in
      the opposite way round, because the three grid intersections
      replacing each 3-way point would be arranged differently.
So the limiting tilings you get as
ε
→ 0 from the left,
      and as
ε
→ 0 from the right, are
almost
exactly
      identical, and they differ only in that one strip of rhombs
      along the line of singularity.
Resolving the singularities in each direction
There always is a whole line of singularity. In any pentagrid
      where three lines meet at a point, one of the lines always
      bisects the angle between the other two. That makes the outer
      two lines symmetric about the middle one, and that in turn means
      that the rest of the lines in those two directions are symmetric
      about the same line. Also, it turns out, the ‘sum to an integer’
      constraint forces the
other
two directions of grid line
      to be symmetric in the same line. So you always end up with a
      pattern that has a line of reflection symmetry, as long as you
      leave those hexagons empty – but when you fill them in, you have
      to make a choice of which way to break the symmetry.
Or rather: there’s always
at least one
line of
      singularity. There’s one extra-special singular pentagrid we can
      make: the one that probably seemed most obvious when I described
      the concept to begin with. What happens if
all five
directions of line pass through the origin, so that there’s a
      5-way intersection point?
Tiling generated from the most singular pentagrid of all
Just as we expect, the 5-way intersection point gives rise to
      an empty decagon at the centre of the pattern. And since the
      pentagrid lines have reflection symmetry in
all five
of
      the lines through the origin, it follows that so does the
      resulting tiling – but, again, only as long as you leave those
      higher-order polygons empty.
How many different ways are there to resolve
these
singularities? It’s tempting to think: there are five lines of
      hexagons, each one can be resolved in two ways, so we have
      2
5
possibilities. But in fact not all of them make
      sense, because the choices aren’t independent.
De Bruijn has a degrees-of-freedom argument that simplifies
      things. We start off with five degrees of freedom in a
      pentagrid: each set of grid lines can be translated by an
      arbitrary distance perpendicular to the lines (and it doesn’t
      matter if you translate it parallel to the lines). We lose one
      degree of freedom because of the ‘sum to an integer’ criterion.
      And two more degrees of freedom must correspond to translating
      the entire pentagrid around the plane while keeping all the grid
      lines in the same relation to each other. That leaves two
      remaining degrees of freedom, so we can consider that the shape
      of a Penrose tiling is characterised by a single point in the
      plane! And when you move that point around very near the origin
      to resolve the singularities in this decagon, the grid lines
      through the origin divide that region of the plane into ten
      sectors, and the only important thing is which of those sectors
      you’re in. So there are ten possible answers, all rotations of
      each other.
That sounds very like the P2 cartwheel pattern, so you probably
      won’t be surprised to hear that this is exactly its P3 analogue.
      In fact you can convert between the two using
      the
interleaved
        substitution system
I described in a previous article, which
      allows you to expand a P3 tiling into a P2 one, and
vice
        versa
. If you resolve the singularities in this P3 pattern,
      and expand it into P2, you get the same Batman figure we saw to
      begin with.
Here’s the finished version of the P3 cartwheel, which has
      coordinates XYXYXY… in the triangles system (similar to the
      ABABAB… that
      I
derived in the
      previous article
for the P2 version). Compared to the
      picture above, this one is rotated 90°, to bring it into the
      same orientation as the P2 version I’ve already exhibited, with
      the line of symmetry vertical.
The P3 cartwheel pattern in full
So this has answered the fundamental question of
why
there are very-nearly-symmetric Penrose tilings that differ only
      along one straight line. They’re generated from pentagrids that
      are
actually
symmetric – but are also singular, meaning
      that something awkward happens on the line of symmetry.
Finding singular and symmetric tilings
So, now that we know that, can we use this to find all the
      interesting instances of P3?
We’ll start by enumerating the pentagrids with 5-way symmetry
      about the origin. There aren’t very many of those, because of
      the ‘sum to an integer’ constraint. In a 5-way symmetric
      pentagrid, the distances from the origin to a grid line in each
      direction must all be the same. So if the sum of all five of
      them is an integer, it follows that the distance must be a
      multiple of 1/5.
So there are just five pentagrids with 5-way symmetry. One of
      them is the 5-way singular one we’ve just seen. The other four
      are
not
singular: no three grid lines meet in a point,
      because the only place that could sensibly happen is the origin,
      and the lines don’t go through there.
But these grids are still 5-way symmetric – it’s just that the
      lines of symmetry are
perpendicular
to the grid lines.
These four patterns correspond to
      the
5-way
      symmetric Penrose tilings
I showed in the previous article.
      I only showed two symmetric P3 tilings there – but the other two
      are just the first two rotated by 180°. In the previous article
      I found that the combinatorial coordinate strings for those
      patterns repeat with period 4 – and that’s consistent with this
      analysis saying there are four of them. Cycling the coordinates
      round one notch at a time iterates through all four.
What about patterns that have just one line of reflection
      symmetry, or just one line of singularity?
The same phenomenon happens here. In a singular tiling, the
      line of not-quite-symmetry has to run parallel to a pentagrid
      line, which makes it perpendicular to the tile edges; but in a
      truly symmetric tiling, it’s the other way round, perpendicular
      to the pentagrid lines and parallel to the tile edges. (The only
      way you could get a non-singular tiling with a line of symmetry
      parallel to a pentagrid line would be if it was exactly half way
      between two pentagrid lines – but it turns out that that
      possibility can’t work: you can’t make the distances sum to an
      integer without the other four pentagrid directions ending up
      asymmetric.)
I can’t list
all
the symmetric tilings, or all the
      singular ones, because in both cases, there’s an uncountable
      infinity of them. This is predicted by both the pentagrid view
      of things
and
the combinatorial coordinate view. With
      pentagrids, once you’ve arranged for two pairs of grid lines to
      have crossings on a line of symmetry (of either type), you still
      have an uncountable set of possible exact positions for those
      crossings
along
the line of symmetry. And with
      combinatorial coordinates, if you expand a small section of the
      line of symmetry a few times until it contains more than one
      subsection like the original, identify the original section with
      an arbitrarily chosen one of those subsections, and repeat at
      larger and larger scales, then you’re making a countably
      infinite number of arbitrary choices from sets of size > 1,
      which again gives you an uncountable number of sequences
      overall.
But there’s one finite class of interesting tiling we can
      enumerate. We can list the tilings that have
both
properties at once: a line of true symmetry,
and
a line
      of singularity, perpendicular to each other.
To enumerate those, suppose we put the origin at the
      intersection of the two lines of symmetry and singularity. What
      are the distances from the origin to the other four grid lines?
The other grid lines come in two pairs; for the required
      symmetry, grid lines of each pair must either both pass through
      the origin, or both miss it by 1/2. Making this choice
      independently for each pair gives four possibilities. One of
      those involves all five lines passing through the origin, so
      it’s the cartwheel pattern again – which does count, because it
      does have a line of true symmetry, and one of the lines of
      singularity is perpendicular to it. The other three
      possibilities give rise to less symmetric patterns which
      have
only
the two symmetries we asked for.
So we’re expecting three different patterns – or rather, six,
      because each one comes in two forms, depending on which way you
      resolve the singularities.
How to work out the combinatorial coordinate representation of
      these? There are several reasonable approaches. One is to
      generate a patch of tiling using this pentagrid technique, and
      feed it to our
coordinate
      finder
. But a more analytic approach is to look at the
      pattern of hexagons along the line of singularity in the earlier
      diagrams, and think about how that line could possibly have
      reflection symmetry:
The singular P3 tiling from above, reproduced for
        reference
Each of the two hexagon types is symmetric about a horizontal
      line through its centre. (No matter which way you resolve the
      singularity – that flips the hexagon left/right, but either way,
      it’s still symmetric in a top/bottom flip.) Also, the taller
      hexagon can appear next to another copy of itself, which
      suggests that perhaps the line of symmetry could appear between
      two of them. The shorter wider hexagon can’t appear next to
      itself in the same way – it doesn’t take much checking to
      confirm that if you put two of them side by side then no P3 tile
      could fit in the gap.
(Of course, in the picture above, the
rest
of the
      tiling isn’t symmetric in any horizontal line through the
      midpoint of one of those hexagons, or through the line between
      two tall ones. But then, that picture wasn’t chosen to have
      symmetry in any horizontal line at all. We’re hoping to do
      better!)
So that suggests that we should expect our three singular
      patterns to have the line of symmetry in those three places: one
      bisecting each hexagon type, and one between two tall hexagons.
Also, what happens if you apply the expansion rules to one of
      these singular patterns? You must still get a
mostly
symmetric plane, with an anomaly down the middle. So it seems
      quite likely that these patterns are expansions of each other,
      in some order.
By that point you can figure it out by hand, without needing to
      go as far as the coordinate-finder algorithm. Work out what
      triangle type appears at the centre of the line of symmetry in
      each case; apply the expansion rules to see what that turns
      into; and see what happens.
The result is that you find a cycle of six coordinates,
      repeating the pattern XXX YYY XXX YYY… forever. And just as we
      half-expected, the first three cyclic rotations of that string
      generate the three types of singular pattern we expected to
      find. The other three generate their mirror images, which don’t
      count as different if you’re thinking about pentagrids, but
      certainly do count as different for combinatorial coordinates,
      which always want to specify all the tiles uniquely.
We can be reasonably confident that we’ve got them all, because
      the two representations agree: the pentagrid analysis predicted
      three mirror-image pairs, and the combinatorial coordinate
      system has found a repeating cycle of six patterns.
So here are those patterns in full. Instead of showing both
      mirror images of each one, I’ve shaded the line of tiles that
      change under a reflection, and lightened the symmetric area. So
      reflecting one of these patterns in the vertical axis changes
      only the shaded tiles.
The three P3 tilings (other than the cartwheel) that are both singular and symmetric
What about the P2 tilings? By considering the
      the
interleaved
        substitution system
, we expect that there should be the same
      number of symmetric and singular tilings for P2 as there are for
      P3, and moreover, we can obtain them by half-expanding each P2
      one. This turns the XXX YYY repeating sequence of coordinates
      into the slightly less regular AVVBUU: the Vs and Us are
      interleaved between consecutive XX or YY, and the A,B appear
      between XY or YX. And here they all are:
The three P2 tilings (other than the cartwheel) that are both singular and symmetric
Singular Spectre tilings
To summarise the previous section very briefly indeed: it turns
      out that there’s a correspondence between Penrose tilings and
      points in a continuous space (namely the space of possible
      pentagrids), but the correspondence isn’t quite 1–1, because
      sometimes an extra-difficult ‘singular’ point in the indexing
      space maps to a thing which isn’t
quite
a complete
      tiling, and which can be completed in more than one way by taking
      a limit, depending on which direction you approach the singular
      point from. And these singular points also have a lot of symmetry,
      meaning that
outside
the incomplete region, the tiling is
      symmetric.
Well, it turns out that this isn’t special to Penrose tilings.
      The Spectre tiling has singular instances too, following
      essentially the same pattern. The differences are, firstly, that
      the strips of differing tiles in the resulting tiling follow
      wiggly curves rather than straight lines; and secondly, Spectre
      tilings don’t have any possibility of
reflection
symmetry at all, even approximate, so all the singular tilings
      have to be nearly
rotationally
symmetric instead.
After I published my previous article, Pieter Mostert responded
      on Mastodon describing a scheme for indexing Spectre tilings via a
      point in the plane, with the same property that along some curves
      in the plane you get a choice of two different Spectre tilings by
      taking limits from opposite sides of the curve. And where those
      curves meet, you get even more choices, in the same way that P3
      tilings have 10-way singularity where all the lines converge at
      the origin.
I’m not able to describe the scheme in detail, because I don’t
      know all the details myself. But it seems to work, because he was
      kind enough to send me several data files describing patches of
      Spectre tiling with a very similar kind of near-symmetry to those
      singular Penrose patterns.
Of course, I wanted to know the combinatorial coordinates
      corresponding to those patches, so that I could re-plot them in my
      own software, and describe them concisely to other people. But all
      I had was a
.csv
file describing
      individual
edges
of the Spectre tiles – not even the
      tiles themselves, let alone any description of the hierarchy of
      supertiles. What to do?
This was the incident that made me get round to writing
      the
coordinate-finder
algorithm
      that I’d speculated about in the previous article. I processed
      Pieter’s initial data file until I’d recovered a description in
      terms of Spectres rather than individual edges, and knew which
      pairs of Spectres were adjacent, and which edges of the pair met
      in every case. Then I fed that description to my newly written
      coordinate finder.
It worked very well! The first data file I received contains a
      little over 50,000 edges, which my processing script converts
      back into 7,000 or so Spectres, occupying a roughly circular
      region. That’s enough that the coordinate finder was able to be
      certain of the first six coordinates of the central tile: it’s a
      Spectre, expanded from an S hex, followed by four parent tiles
      which are also all S hexes, with each one being child #3 of its
      parent. So the natural guess would be that the
infinite
coordinate sequence corresponding to this patch continues (S, 3)
      for ever. And indeed that is also one of the possibilities
      allowed by the DFA output by the coordinate finder.
The patch Pieter provided had 6-way near-symmetry – and so does
      the version I recreated from those coordinates. I’ve rendered it
      using the same colour convention as in the previous section: the
      light-coloured tiles are symmetric in all six rotations of the
      whole pattern, whereas the dark ones can vary.
A six-way singular Spectre tiling
Like all the best pictures in these articles, this one is both
      beautiful,
and
mathematically interesting. I hardly
      need to explain the ‘beautiful’ part – just look at those
      interweaving wiggly lines of variable tiles. Fantastic! Beats
      the straight spokes of the Penrose cartwheel, hands down.
Part of the ‘interesting’ is simply that this is a six-way
      singular tiling in the first place. Now I have some
      understanding of where those come from, it’s not
so
surprising that they exist, but it’s still interesting to see it
      as one of the things that these very different aperiodic tilings
      have in common.
But here’s another thing.
This picture is another copy of
      my very first example of a Spectre infinite supertile
      boundary!
I describe it here as the (S, 3) infinite supertile, because
      those are the coordinates of the supertile containing the very
      centre of the pattern. But that supertile doesn’t occupy the
      whole plane. There’s an infinite supertile boundary, which I
      haven’t shown in the above image because it would spoil the
      symmetry – and on the other side of that boundary is our old
      friend (Y, 7) again. When I showed it
      in
the
      previous article
I had mentioned that the other side of the
      boundary was (S, 3) – and when I saw that output from the
      coordinate finder, I recognised it.
When I discussed the same (Y, 7) supertile
      in
a previous section of this
      article
, I also showed that it was one of a pair of tilings
      differing only in a single path of Spectres. That suggests that
      the other one of those tilings might also be 6-way singular!
And it is. Here are the two shown together, so you can flip
      back and forth between them. You can see that the varying path
      between the two is not
separate
from the paths that
      vary under rotation: it’s one of the same paths.
Two slightly different six-way singular Spectre
        tilings
In fact you can see that the wiggly paths radiating from the
      centre come in two kinds: more wiggly, and less wiggly. We’ve
      seen those two different kinds of wiggliness before,
      in
the previous pictures of these
      tilings
. The way I’ve overlaid the two in this diagram, the
      differing path is one of the less wiggly ones, which means I
      must have made the (Y, 7) infinite supertile in the second
      picture occupy the same space as to the (X, 7)(P, 7) in the
      first. If I had rotated one of those tilings 60° with respect to
      the other, I could have made (Y, 7) correspond to (P, 7)(X, 7)
      instead, and then the two tilings would have differed along one
      of the
more
wiggly paths. Putting those together, we
      see that the
real
difference between these two actual
      tilings is that the more wiggly paths are rotated 60° relative
      to the less wiggly ones!
Pieter Mostert also sent data files describing a pair of
      singular Spectre tilings with 3-way and 2-way near-symmetry, and
      I ran those through the coordinate finder too. The 3-way one
      turns out to have coordinates that repeat with period 2, which
      means you can get another different 3-way instance by cycling
      those coordinates around a notch. Here are both:
Two three-way singular Spectre tilings
Here, again, the paths come in ‘more wiggly’ and ‘less wiggly’
      forms, and there’s one singular tiling for each kind.
The singular pattern with 2-way near-symmetry wasn’t so clear.
      The first
four
parents of the lowest-order hex type
      were all different – and that’s about the point where the
      coordinate finder stopped having enough tiles to determine
      further coordinates. It looked as if repeating that sequence of
      four parents was the simplest possibility, but I wasn’t very
      confident that that would be right.
However, Pieter’s alternative representation came to the
      rescue, because
that
predicts a cycle of order 4. So,
      by using both representations together, these seem to be the
      2-way singular Spectre patterns:
(G, 5)(P, 2)(F, 1)(D, 6)
(D, 6)(G, 5)(P, 2)(F, 1)
(F, 1)(D, 6)(G, 5)(P, 2)
(P, 2)(F, 1)(D, 6)(G, 5)
Four two-way singular Spectre tilings
What’s going on with the ‘more wiggly’ vs ‘less wiggly’
      distinction in these pictures? Certainly there are two
      more-wiggly and two less-wiggly paths. But for each of those
      types, the two patterns of that type are still different in
      other ways. For example, in the two ‘more wiggly’ cases
      (G, 5)(P, 2)(F, 1)(D, 6) and (F, 1)(D, 6)(G, 5)(P, 2), the path
      has a mirror-image shape at the centre, curving like an S in the
      first one and a reversed S in the second.
Singular hat tilings
Of course, now I’ve shown a load of singular tilings for both
      Penrose tilings and Spectres, hats are next! It turns out that
      the singular tilings for hats follow very much the same pattern
      as the ones for Spectres.
I obtained the coordinates for all the singular Spectre tilings
      in the previous section by applying my coordinate finder to
      finite tiling patches generated by Pieter Mostert’s entirely
      different method. But the ones in this section I worked out
      myself, with (in one case) a minor hint.
Firstly, the six-way singular tilings. The clue I started from
      here was that in the Spectre system, one of the six-way singular
      tilings has two adjacent infinite supertiles which are the same
      shape, because although they have different coordinates in the
      9-hex substitution system, both correspond to the same
      coordinates in the less detailed H
7
/H
8
style system. So I was able to investigate the corresponding
      systems for hats, and found that there’s also a supertile in the
      H
7
/H
8
system which can fit alongside
      itself with a 60° rotation. Finding the possible 10-hex coordinates
      of that supertile led me to the following two singular tilings
      with six-way near-symmetry:
Two slightly different six-way singular hat
        tilings
One difference you can immediately see here is that, where the
      Spectre singular tilings had two kinds of wiggly varying path
      with different styles of wiggle, in the hat version only one of
      the types of path is wiggly at all. The other type follows a
      perfectly straight line, at a slightly slanting angle. So this
      tiling has a mixture of the properties of the Penrose tiling
      (varying paths are all straight) and the Spectre tiling (all
      wiggly).
Just like the Spectre case, the way in which these two singular
      tilings differ is that one of the path types is rotated 60°
      relative to the other one. The way I’ve shown them here, the
      wiggly paths match up perfectly between the pair, but flipping
      back and forth changes the state of just one of the
      straight-line paths.
What would it have looked like if I’d instead rotated the
      diagrams so that the straight paths match and just one of the
      wiggly paths change? We’ve seen the answer
      already:
that
pair of nearly matching patterns is the
      one I
found in
      the last article
by having the HTPF transducer construction
      fail. These tilings are the same two as in that picture – I
      noticed that they were very similar to
each other
,
      because the transducer failure pointed that out, but I didn’t
      notice the fact that each of them was also very similar
      to
itself
under a 60° rotation, because both are 6-way
      singular!
Some more singular hat tilings are easy to find by thinking
      about the near-symmetries in the HTPF substitution system. The T
      tile expands to a mostly-symmetric pattern (varying only in the
      orientation arrows on the tiles) with a H at its centre; the H
      expands to a similarly mostly-symmetric pattern with an T at its
      centre. So expanding back and forth between H and T, keeping the
      expansions centrally symmetric, is bound to generate
      a
mostly
three-way symmetric tiling of the plane. The
      cycle of expansions is shown below: the circled H tile in the
      middle picture expands to the diagram on the right, and the
      circled T tile in the final picture is identified with the T we
      started from, and so on for ever.
Cycle of HTPF expansions giving three-way
        singularity
Converting that idea back into 10-hex
      coordinates so that a transducer can generate it, we get the
      following pair of patterns, with the coordinates being cyclic
      rotations of each other:
Two three-way singular hat tilings
These two patterns are different from each other, but both of
      them have their variable tiles arranged into the wiggly kind of
      path, rather than the straight one – unlike the 3-way singular
      Spectre tilings, in which the two related coordinate sequences
      delivered one path of each kind.
(I haven’t found a three-way singular hat tiling
      with
straight
paths. That seems odd, because in the
      Spectre system we had three-way singular patterns for each of
      the two different kinds of path. Perhaps there’s one I’ve
      missed?)
Another case that’s easy to see in the HTPF system: the P tile
      has a mostly 2-way symmetric expansion with another P tile at
      its centre. So if you repeatedly expand a P keeping central
      symmetry, you expect to get a mostly 2-way symmetric tiling.
Trivial cycle of HTPF expansions giving two-way
        singularity
And indeed you do: it has coordinates (G, 6) in the 10-hex
      system, and it’s shown here, with a wiggly path of variable
      hats.
A two-way singular hat tiling with a wiggly
        path
At this point I ran out of ideas for ways to find paths. But
      Pieter Mostert said that his alternative representation of the
      hat tiling system predicts some further 2-way singular patterns,
      with straight rather than wiggly paths.
It took me a while to figure those ones out. Eventually I did
      it by generating a larger patch of one of the 6-way singular
      tilings above, and looking further out from the origin to find a
      piece of straight path by itself. Then I zoomed in on that
      section and looked at the local coordinates of hats in that path
      until I saw a pattern.
The result turns out to have coordinates which repeat with
      period 3, which of course means there are three similar patterns
      with the same property. Here they are:
A family of two-way singular hat tilings with
        straight paths
A natural question about these three patterns is: if I wasn’t
      able to find them by thinking about the HTPF system, why not?
      What
is
the HTPF representation of these tilings? Did I
      just miss something obvious, or is it not obvious at all?
To find that out, let’s start by converting this tiling
      back
into
its lowest order of HTPF metatiles, and
      having a look at where the varying path goes. I’ve arranged the
      radio buttons for this set of images in a cyclic order that lets
      you flip between each hat tiling and its metatile translation,
      or between the two metatile tilings, or (if your browser lets
      you press Left/Right to cycle round the end) between the two hat
      tilings. But the important part is comparing the two metatile
      arrangements:
Both rotations of a two-way singular hat tiling,
        with HTPF translation
No wonder I didn’t find those by any HTPF-related thought
      process! A whole row of metatiles is changing completely, but
      the underlying hats change much less, because of multiple
      correspondences that the metatiles themselves hide:
the P and F metatiles expand to the same pair of hats
        connected the same way, so a P can change into an F in this
        rotation without the hats moving
the flat end of an F and the ‘tail of the arrow’ corner of
        an H can similarly change into a whole F rotated 60°
a T metatile and the ‘left of the arrowhead’ corner of an H
        can become a P.
In other words, the HTPF system actually
obscures
some
      of the ways in which the underlying hats match each other. But
      at the same time, it makes some of the other ones very clear – I
      was able to find the previous few tilings
more
easily
      than I could have done it for Spectres!
In fact, the HTPF coordinates of these final three singular
      tilings are obtained by the following cycle, in which an F tile
      is identified with the F between the two same-orientation H
      expanded from another H expanded from the pointy end of the
      original F (phew!):
Cycle of HTPF expansions giving two-way
        singularity along a straight path
Stars and propellers
Let’s go back to a thing we found out earlier about the Spectre
      tiling. The infinite supertiles (Y, 7), (P, 7)(X, 7) and
      (X, 7)(P, 7) all have exactly the same shape and the same layout
      of tiles. And because the last two of those supertiles appear in
      the
same
overall tiling of the plane, it follows that
      that shape fits next to another copy of itself, with a 60°
      rotation.
If you insist on filling the rest of the plane with actual
      Spectres, then we already know what happens: you get one of the
      6-way singular Spectre tilings
      we’ve
already seen above
. But if
      you don’t, then there’s a much simpler thing you can do. Since
      this shape of infinite supertile fits next to itself with a 60°
      rotation, it follows that we can simply repeat it six times
      round the origin, to obtain a tiling of
most
of the
      plane with Spectres, with 6-way true symmetry.
Of course, there would be no way to fill in the gap in the
      middle with Spectres. Not just ‘no way to fill it in
      symmetrically’: no way to fill it in
at all
. That
      follows from the existing theory: without even checking what the
      shape of the gap turns out to be, we can already be confident
      that it won’t be tileable with Spectres.
But I thought it would be amusing to generate the pattern
      anyway. Partly, it would at least be pretty; also, it’s a sort
      of ‘near miss’ 6-way-symmetric Spectre tiling in a different
      sense from the singular ones we saw earlier. Those were tilings
      of the entire plane with Spectres, which were
      only
mostly
symmetric; this one is going to be entirely
      symmetric, but it’ll only be a Spectre tiling of
most
of the plane. So they’re sort of counterparts of each other.
The tiling looks like this:
A symmetric Spectre tiling with an anomalous star at
        the centre
Hooray, that
is
pretty! The pattern as a whole has
      6-way rotational symmetry, so we expected the same from the gap
      at its centre. But it turns out we got even more: that star has
      12-way rotational symmetry
and
is reflection-symmetric.
      Lovely!
I posted that on Mastodon, during the conversation that
      followed on from my previous article, and some things happened.
Spectre + star + propeller tiling
Robin Houston wondered if it was possible to get
more
than one star into the tiling, perhaps making it periodic in the
      process. He didn’t manage to produce a tiling of just stars and
      Spectres, but he was able to make a periodic tiling by
      surrounding each star with the first two rings of Spectres from
      the picture above, and then using a ‘propeller’ shape – also
      seen in
      the
wheel
      tiling
– to fill the remaining gaps:
Robin Houston’s periodic tiling of spectres, stars
        and propellers
But then Pieter Mostert observed that this tiling is one of an
      infinite family! You can derive it by extending
      the
mapping rules
we’ve
      previously seen, which give rise to the Spectre
      H
7
/H
8
substitution system. We colour and
      orient the edges of the star and propeller shapes in the same
      way that we did for the Spectre tiles themselves: colours depend
      on whether the edge’s direction is an odd or even multiple of
      30°, and orientation alternates around the tile. Then we can
      apply exactly the same rules as before for mapping the two edge
      types.
Under the same rules that expand a Spectre into a shape that
      can be tiled with 9 more Spectres (including a skew one), the
      propeller shape expands into a shape that can be tiled with 9
      ordinary Spectres with another propeller at the centre:
Expansion of a propeller via the Spectre H
7
/H
8
edge mapping
There’s a subtlety here, though. The Spectres on the right-hand
      side of this expansion are reflected compared to the ones we saw
      on the left in the earlier section. So it follows that the
      propeller must also be reflected – which, since it’s symmetric,
      turns out to be the same thing as saying that its orientation
      has changed from an even to an odd multiple of 30°. In other
      words, there are
two
propeller shapes we must consider:
      the one above, and the ‘skew propeller’.
The skew propeller does something completely different when you
      expand it, for the same reason as the skew Spectre: pairs of
      green and yellow edges which previously met at a right angle one
      way round, causing their expansions to meet at the centre of a
      double-length green edge, now meet at a right angle the other
      way round, so that their expansions double back to create a
      spur.
Expansion of a skew propeller via the Spectre
        H
7
/H
8
edge mapping
The result is that the skew propeller expands to … just a
      propeller. This time, nothing is confusingly negative: as the
      input outline goes anticlockwise round the input propeller, the
      output one also goes anticlockwise round the output propeller.
      So this isn’t a weird anti-tile that cancels something out: it
      just means that a skew propeller turns back into a regular one
      under expansion.
What about the star?
Expansion of a star via the Spectre H
7
/H
8
edge mapping
The star just expands into an exact copy of itself, if you
      discount the zero-thickness spurs as usual. So this time we’re
      not changing anything about its orientation or sense. This shape
      is simply invariant under expansion.
Putting this all together, we can expand Robin Houston’s
      original tiling into a larger one. But more than that: we can
      show that Robin’s tiling is
itself
the result of an
      expansion of this type, because you can start from
just
stars and propellers! Here are the first four tilings you get
      from this process.
Successive instances of the periodic Spectre/star/propeller tiling
In each expansion, the type of the propeller reverses. We begin
      at level 0 with regular propellers nestling between the stars.
      In the first expansion, generating Robin’s tiling, each regular
      propeller turns into 9 Spectres around a skew propeller – but
      all the Spectres are in one of the regular orientations (no skew
      ones). In the second expansion, the skew propellers turn back
      into regular ones, generating no additional tiles – but the
      existing Spectres all expand into multiple tiles, introducing
      skew Spectres for the first time. And in the final expansion
      I’ve shown here, both things happen at once – the regular
      propeller generates more Spectres around it
and
all the
      existing Spectres expand into more Spectres.
You can continue this process for ever, obtaining a sequence of
      periodic tilings with larger and larger fundamental regions, so
      that the stars and propellers move further apart, and more of
      the plane is covered in Spectres. My original tiling, with just
      one star, can be seen as a ‘limit’ of this infinite process: if
      you keep one star stationary in every expansion, as I’ve shown
      in the bottom left of the series of pictures above, then every
      part of the plane changes only finitely many times, and is
      eventually invariant. Taking the union of
all
the
      invariant parts, we get a tiling in which the propellers have
      all gone off to infinity and vanished completely, and the whole
      plane is covered in Spectres, except for the one remaining star.
      And that’s exactly the tiling I started with!
But that’s not the only way to take a limit of this tiling.
      What if we kept a
propeller
in the same place, instead
      of a star? Then all the
stars
ought to go off to
      infinity and vanish, and we’ll be left with a plane full of
      Spectres, except for one propeller at the centre.
There’s a minor hitch that if you expand that way round,
nothing
in the plane is eventually stationary, because
      the whole tiling oscillates with period 2 between one pattern
      centred on a regular propeller, and a completely different one
      centred on a skew propeller. So instead we have to consider the
      odd and even iterations separately, and take a limit of each
      one, obtaining two different limiting tilings:
Three-way symmetric Spectre tilings surrounding a
        regular propeller and skew propeller
You can see that these tilings have all the properties we’d
      expect. Both have 3-way rotational symmetry, because the
      propeller itself does, and hence, so does its expansion, and
      therefore its
n
th-order expansion for any
n
. In
      the tiling around a skew propeller, the first skew Spectres are
      further away from the centre, because the skew propeller has
      just been expanded from a regular propeller, which surrounded it
      with a newly generated shell of 9 regular Spectres; flipping
      back to the other tiling, the skew propeller turns back into a
      regular one, and the Spectres nearest to it each expand into a
      patch containing a skew one.
Perhaps these tilings aren’t
that
impressive. The
      original tiling with a central star had more symmetry than you
      can get out of any pure Spectre tiling (those can only go up to
      3-way rotational symmetry, or 6-way
near
-symmetry in
      the singular case). But these tilings with a central propeller
      are only 3-way symmetric, and
      we’ve
already
      seen
that you can do
that
with pure Spectres,
      without needing
any
kind of anomaly at the centre.
But the thing I like about these limiting propeller tilings is
      that they reject the hierarchical structure of normal Spectre
      tilings much more profoundly than the star tiling I started
      with. In that one, the plane (apart from the star) was divided
      into six regions, each of which was a legitimate infinite-order
      supertile from a full Spectre tiling. The only way I ‘cheated’
      was by putting six of them around a point, which can’t work in a
      full Spectre tiling of the plane – but within each one, the
      hierarchical substitution system is still respected, on all
      scales.
But here, I’m pretty convinced that there is
no
infinite-order supertile that would also fit into the ordinary
      Spectre tiling. There are
finite
-order supertiles of
      every size, further and further away from the origin; but each
      oscillation between a regular and skew propeller introduces a
      fresh ring of Spectres at the centre, which pushes all the other
      supertiles further away. So the Spectres at the centre aren’t
      overlapped by any larger-order supertile at all, and therefore,
      the first ring of
n
th-order supertiles further out from
      the origin aren’t overlapped by any (
n
+ 1)th-order
      supertile. The larger you make
n
, the larger the central
      region of this tiling which has no
n
th-order supertile
      structure at all.
In my imagination, that propeller is actually spinning,
      creating a current of Spectres flowing away from the origin in
      all directions, so that they never have a chance to build up
      into an infinite supertile!
Doing the same for hats
The same process can be carried through for the hat tiling, by
      making the hat analogues of the propeller and star outlines, and
      applying the
hat edge mapping
      rules
to find the shapes they expand into.
The outlines themselves are a little bit distorted, because the
      difference between the Spectre and hat worlds is that in the hat
      world our yellow edges are longer than the green ones by a
      factor of √3. So the propeller becomes asymmetric under
      reflection, and the star will have fewer axes of symmetry than
      the Spectre version did.
Expansion of a propeller via the hat H
7
/H
8
edge mapping
Just as in the Spectre case, the propeller has expanded into a
      region that can be tiled with nine hats and another propeller.
      The hats are all the normal way round – no reflected hats here.
      But the propeller is the mirror image of the starting one (which
      is more obvious in this system, where the different edge lengths
      make it asymmetric, and the expansion process doesn’t introduce
      an extra reflection to confuse matters).
So next we need to know what the
reflected
propeller
      expands to. And, just as in the Spectre case, it turns back into
      a regular propeller, with no surrounding hats:
Expansion of a reflected propeller via the hat H
7
/H
8
edge mapping
This is all looking so familiar that we’d be surprised if the
      star
didn’t
work exactly the same as before, expanding
      into an exact copy of itself with spurs sticking out. And indeed
      that is exactly what it does:
Expansion of a star via the hat H
7
/H
8
edge mapping
(Incidentally, the spurs in this expansion
      aren’t
completely
useless. The endpoint of each spur is
      the image of one of the vertices of the original star. So if you
      were to place two stars so that they touch at that vertex, then
      in the expansion, the endpoints of the two corresponding spurs
      would have to coincide. So the spurs show you how far apart the
      stars must move in the first level of expansion. The same is
      true for the Spectre case above.)
Putting all of that together, we can make an infinite series of
      periodic tilings in exactly the same way as before, starting
      from pure stars and propellers and expanding repeatedly by the
      above rules:
Successive instances of the periodic hat/star/propeller tiling
Again, this follows exactly the same pattern as before. We
      start with just stars and regular propellers; in the first
      expansion, the propellers turn into reflected ones and introduce
      only normal-orientation hats; in the second expansion reflected
      hats appear for the first time, while the propellers reset to
      the regular orientation; and so on.
What about the limiting tilings? Here are all three.
Limiting hat tilings surrounding a single propeller
        or star
What’s the best substitution system?
By now, I’ve collected a lot of different substitution systems
      for all of these aperiodic tilings.
If you’ve been following this article series from the
      beginning, since I first thought it would be neat to allow
      players of Loopy to play it on the hat tiling, I’ve gone through
four
different substitution systems for hats. I started
      with overlapping HTPF (which is still what Loopy actually uses
      for its generation, because now it would break backwards
      compatibility to change it); moved to the non-overlapping
      version to try a transducer (unsuccessfully); heard about Bowen
      Ping and Brad Klee’s 10-hex system which fixed the transducer
      problem; and now I’ve been talking about the
      H
7
/H
8
system.
Spectres have no HTPF analogue, and the 9-hex system from the
      Spectre paper worked first time with my transducers, so I’ve
      mostly stuck with that. But I’ve mentioned the
      H
7
/H
8
style system for those as well in
      this article.
And I
thought
I was firmly committed to the triangles
      view of the Penrose tilings – until I found my new
      adjacency-recogniser algorithm, which makes the whole-tile
      substitution systems feasible to use.
I keep changing my mind about which systems are best. Which
      system is
really
best, for each tiling?
I think my answer has to be that well-known unsatisfying
      one:
it depends on what you’re trying to achieve.
Taking the Penrose systems first: if you want to
      actually
generate
tiling instances in software in a
      practical way – especially if you want to do it completely at
      random, and don’t care whether or not you happen to hit any of
      these mathematically interesting cases with symmetry or
      singularity or infinite supertile boundaries – then I would now
      recommend the whole-tile systems, because they require the least
      code. You can just import one of my transducers (generated by
      the Sage program linked from the previous article) as a magic
      state-machine data table, and then all you need is code to
      transform a coordinate string using that transducer, code to
      randomly extend the starting string as necessary, and code to
      place the tiles in the plane. Doing it any other way requires
      more code: using the whole-tile systems with a recursive
      algorithm would require backtracking for spurs, and using the
      triangle system in any way would require a postprocessing
      stage.
But if you want to
understand
Penrose tilings and
      their structure, then I still think the triangles system has the
      edge over whole Penrose tiles – although, as we’ve seen above,
      it might also be worth learning about de Bruijn’s pentagrids,
      since they give an understanding of singularity, which the
      coordinates system in general doesn’t, even in the triangle
      system.
(On the other hand, I definitely don’t recommend
using
pentagrids for practical tiling generation! It
      is
possible
– I did it myself to generate the diagrams
      in the pentagrid section of this article – so if you want to try
      it for sheer curiosity and learning experience, I wouldn’t stop
      you. But it’s not very practical. It’s horribly slow, because
      you need an exact arithmetic package: you’d be overwhelmed by
      rounding errors if you tried it in fast floating point. Not only
      that, you might also need to model some kind of infinitesimals
      if you want to be able to resolve singular pentagrids reliably
      into tilings. Ugh.)
For Spectres: the 9-hex system is nicely unambiguous, in the
      sense that it’s possible to build a finite-state transducer,
      because the
n
th-order supertile type of a tile’s
      neighbour can always be determined with a bounded amount of
      information about the original tile’s supertiles at higher
      orders. As a corollary, every
infinite
-order supertile
      described in the 9-hex system has a unique neighbour, so that
      even infinitary uses of a transducer never run into an
      ambiguity: a single input string of coordinates reliably
      describes a whole plane tiling.
But, again, there are some kinds of understanding that the
      9-hex system doesn’t deliver. The simpler
      H
7
/H
8
style system, which is too ambiguous
      to build a transducer for, was useful to me
      precisely
because
the transducer construction failed –
      the failure pointed me to those pairs of similar Spectre
      tilings, which (with hindsight, although I didn’t make the leap
      at the time) could have been a clue to discovering at least one
      singular Spectre pattern by myself.
In fact, I think (although this is an intuitive handwave
      without proof) that the H
7
/H
8
style system
      is likely to be
maximally
ambiguous. Because it’s so
      closely related to what I described as the ‘true’ substitution
      that operates directly on individual Spectre tiles, it conveys
      as little information as possible about what neighbours a tile
      has, so that the coordinates of a particular infinite supertile
      reflect only the necessary
layout of tiles
within that
      supertile, and not anything about its neighbouring supertiles.
      So the ‘local plausibility’ idea I mentioned
      in
the previous
      article
is defined as widely as possible: an adjacency
      recogniser built from H
7
/H
8
will consider
      two coordinates as potentially adjacent if their shapes fit at
      all. By contrast, the 9-hex system is
      deliberately
including
extra information about the
      wider context of a tile, encoded in the larger set of tile
      types, and so
its
notion of local plausibility is
      narrower – so much so that no ambiguity remains.
This ‘maximal ambiguity’ property makes the
      H
7
/H
8
style system very unhelpful for
      generating tilings, but again, useful for understanding, because
      it allows you to directly ask questions like ‘Which
      infinite-order supertiles fit alongside each other without any
      gaps?’. There are ways to ask that question by directly
      analysing the H
7
/H
8
adjacency recogniser –
      and they wouldn’t work in the 9-hex system, which would miss the
      point entirely, by telling you that every supertile had only one
      possible neighbour.
(One of the links below goes to a web page where someone has
      already done some analysis on Spectre supertile shapes.)
And then, once you’ve identified the coordinates of a supertile
      of interest in the H
7
/H
8
system, it
      becomes useful that that system and 9-hex are very strongly
      related: you can figure out the full set of 9-hex coordinate
      sequences that have that supertile shape, and look at them all
      to see what else fits along that supertile.
So if you really want to
understand
Spectres, I think
      it’s useful to know
both
systems, and play them off
      against each other.
What about hats? For very similar reasons, I think it can be
      useful to work with both an H
7
/H
8
style
      system and the 10-hex system. The hat 10-hex system is similar
      to Spectre 9-hex in that you can match up its hexagons to the
      hats in a patch expanded from a single hat, so that again, after
      you’ve identified a thing of interest described in
      H
7
/H
8
terms, you can reliably
      determine
all
of its possible 10-hex coordinates.
(One note of warning there. In
      the
previous section
where I described hat H
7
/H
8
, I mentioned
      that there were two choices of which neighbour you merge the
      reflected hat with, and both generate viable substitution
      systems. The 10-hex system I showed in the previous article
      turns out to be based on the
other
choice from the
      version in the hat paper. So if you use the
alternative
hat H
7
/H
8
system for investigations like
      this, it’ll be easier to match up the results afterwards to
      10-hex.)
Where does the HTPF system fit in? I’m not really sure. It was
      useful to me in the exercise of looking for singular hat tilings
      – its nice chunky metatiles with simple symmetric shapes made it
      immediately obvious where to find a 3-way singular pattern (at
      the centre of the T → H → T expansion cycle) and a 2-way one
      (P → P). But on the other hand, the
other
2-way
      singular patterns appeared in a place that the HTPF system
      actively hid. So it’s good for some kinds of understanding but
      not others. I think I’d say: keep it in your toolbox but be
      aware that it doesn’t fit all situations.
For
practical
generation of hat tilings,
      I recommend the 10-hex system, because you can build a
      transducer from it. But if you prefer HTPF style systems, then
      here’s one little contribution of my own: an unambiguous version
      of HTPF, which my algorithms
can
build a transducer
      from. I constructed it by figuring out the correspondence
      between the HTPF tiles and clusters of 10-hex hexagons: it
      turned out that there were three different clusters of hexagons
      that correspond to an F tile, two clusters for an H, and still
      only one kind of T and one P. So I made this “HHTPFFF” system,
      which splits those tile types apart from each other, and shows
      which kind appears where:
Substitution rules for the HHTPFFF hat system
(This is a bit of an afterthought, so I’ve shown these diagrams
      small, and without any of the detailed edge mapping. Everything
      not shown about this system is the same as the one for the
      previous non-overlapping HTPF, which
      I
showed
      in the previous article
. This system looks exactly like that
      one in the details of how the edges match, and how each metatile
      finally converts into hats. The
only
difference is that
      there are two H and three F, and these expansions show which
      ones appear in which positions.)
In this system, the ambiguous (F, 5)
      supertile
shown
      in the previous article
splits into two: you have to decide
      whether it’s (F0, 5) or (F1, 5), and whichever you choose, the
      far side of its boundary is now uniquely determined. So it
      resolves the previously ambiguous case just as the 10-hex system
      did, but it looks more like the HTPF system you were already
      familiar with.
Conclusion
This has been a miscellaneous collection of topics, so there’s
      not a lot of unifying conclusion I can draw from all of it
      together. But here’s one theme that has run through a lot of the
      article.
In
the
        previous article
, when I first demonstrated my Spectre
        transducer working by showing a picture of the (Y, 7) infinite
        supertile and its (S, 3) neighbour, I said this:
It’s almost a disappointment that it just looks like
      more of the same kind of Spectre tiling, isn’t it? There’s no
      obvious symmetry here; no noticeable change of quality between
      the two sides of the boundary. The boundary itself is the most
      interesting thing, with its self-similarly crinkly shape – but
      if I hadn’t drawn it in a thick line, you’d never have been able
      to pick it out, or even detect that this wasn’t a perfectly
      ordinary patch of Spectre tiling. There’s nothing special to be
      seen at all.
After getting to the end of this followup article, my biggest
      conclusion is:
wow
, was I wrong there. Wrong, wrong,
      wrong. Absolutely brimming over with wrongability.
That specific pattern turned out to be one of a ‘minimal pair’
      in the Spectre tiling, analogous to the one I was so impressed
      by in the hat tiling. But I didn’t know it at the time, because
      I hadn’t found the other pattern it was almost identical to.
It’s
also
one of the two singular Spectre tilings with
      6-way near-symmetry – the highest order that can possibly come
      up in any singular or truly symmetric Spectre tiling. That makes
      it (and its counterpart) the Spectre analogues of the Penrose
      cartwheel pattern – and that’s one of the most famous Penrose
      tilings in existence. I didn’t spot that either. (Come to think
      of it, I also didn’t spot the cartwheel pattern itself, when I
      generated it by chance in the previous article –
or
the
      fact that my ambiguous pair of hat tilings were also 6-way
      singular.)
And
, as if that’s not enough, it also contains an
      infinite supertile capable of fitting alongside another copy of
      itself, giving rise to the star pattern I showed earlier.
It would be difficult to find a single other Spectre tiling
      with
more
interesting things about it than this one and
      its twin. And I called it boring! I apologise wholeheartedly to
      (Y, 7).
Software
I linked to my Sage implementation of these algorithms from the
      previous article, but for convenience, here it is again. I’ve
      updated it for the new improved features discussed here.
You can clone the git repository with this command:
git clone https://git.tartarus.org/simon/tilings.git
Or you can browse the repository
on the web
.
Acknowledgements and references
Pieter Mostert told me about the singular Spectre tilings, and
      generated enough information to identify their coordinates, via
      his cut-and-project system. At the time of me writing this, he
      didn’t have a full writeup of his system, but I’ll come back
      here and add a link if I hear of one in future. But here’s a
      link to
      the
Mastodon
      thread where we discussed it.
Robin Houston had the idea of finding the initial
      Spectre-star-propeller tiling, starting from my simpler tiling
      with Spectres and just one star. Here’s a link to the
      separate
Mastodon
      thread
where that happened.
I’m further indebted to Pieter Mostert for (indirectly)
      describing the edge mappings for the two
      H
7
/H
8
substitution systems. It was also
      his idea to apply them to the stars and propellers, generating
      the larger family of star+propeller tilings shown in this
      article.
I’ve been using some idiosyncratic terminology in this series
      of articles, because I’ve been working out for myself a lot of
      stuff that was already known in the mathematical literature
      under different names. So I should acknowledge some of the
      standard terms:
When I’ve cut Penrose kites, darts and rhombs into two
        triangular halves to make the substitution systems easier, it
        turns out the usual name for these is
Robinson
        triangles
.
The idea I’ve been calling ‘combinatorial coordinates’,
        representing a tile’s position within an infinite substitution
        system, is called an
address
in some works,
        such
        as
Chaim
        Goodman-Strauss’s paper
that I linked to in the previous
        article. But it’s also known as a
Conway
        signature
in other work, such as Maurizio Paolini’s
        web page that I link to below.
When I turn one tiling into a finer one by mapping each
        input tile to multiple output tiles, I’ve been calling that
        ‘expansion’, by analogy with macro expansion in software. In
        the literature this is known as
deflation
,
        and its inverse (passing from a tiling to its supertiles) is
        therefore
inflation
. (It’s awkward that we’ve
        chosen opposite operations to correspond to the word that
        means ‘making something bigger’! I suppose both are natural in
        their way; inflation makes the
tiles
bigger, while
        deflation – my ‘expansion’ – makes any finite patch
        of
tiling
bigger, in the sense of containing more
        tiles.)
The term
Conway worm
is used in various
        places for those individual paths of tiles that can be flipped
        into a different state without affecting the rest of a plane
        tiling. I’ve tried not to use that term in this article,
        because I was worried about using it wrongly: I haven’t found
        a formal definition, so I don’t know whether it applies
        to
any
such path, or specifically the ones that arise
        from the ‘singularity’ phenomenon.
Some references to papers and other web pages:
Nicolas de Bruijn, “Algebraic theory of Penrose's non-periodic
        tilings of the plane”, 1981. In two parts:
        [
Part
          I
]
        [
Part
          II
]
I recommend this whole paper – there’s more in it than the
        pentagrids I’ve shown here and the missing proofs. Also
        discusses lifting P3 tilings out of the plane into a ‘Wieringa
        roof’ with only one kind of rhombus tilted at different angles,
        and generation of P3 tilings by taking a slice through a
        five-dimensional cubic lattice.
Maurizio Paolini’s web page “
Spectre tilings with given Conway signatures
”
Catalogues infinite supertiles in the Spectre
        H
7
/H
8
-style substitution system, listing
        which ones fit alongside which other ones to cover the plane.
Arnaud Chéritat’s web page “
4D lift of the tilings by the Smith et al. aperiodic monotile
”
Describes the 4-dimensional coordinate system I mentioned in
        connection with
direct inflation and
        deflation on the hat and Spectre tiles
, and goes much
        further, discussing projections into particular subspaces of
        that 4-dimensional space.
Joshua Socolar, “
Quasicrystalline structure of the Smith monotile tilings
”
I said in my previous article that I probably wasn’t the
        first to find that pair of hat tilings differing only in a
        single path. Indeed I wasn’t: this paper found it in May 2023.
        Figure 18 is the same tiling as the one I described. Also,
        Figure 16 shows the rotated version I showed
        in
this article
, with a straight
        rather than wiggly path.
The
references
        section in the previous article
might also be useful.
