---
title: "Aperiodic Tilings V: the Refinable Frontier"
url: "https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/quasiblog/aperiodic-refine/"
fetched_at: 2026-04-25T12:02:09.614570+00:00
source: "chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# Aperiodic Tilings V: the Refinable Frontier

Source: https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/quasiblog/aperiodic-refine/

Aperiodic Tilings V: the Refinable Frontier
[Simon Tatham, 2025-09-02]
[Part of a series:
Penrose and hats
|
Spectres
|
finite-state transducers
|
more transducers
|
refining tilings
]
Introduction
(I know, I know. I’m running out of title ideas.)
This is article #5 in my series about generating aperiodic
      tilings using string-processing techniques. Every time, there’s
      more to recap from the previous ones. So I’m just going to start
      with the introduction to
this
article, and fill in the
      recap in a moment.
In the previous two articles I’ve talked about using a
      finite-state transducer to move around a tiling, tracking your
      current position as a string of combinatorial coordinates, and
      using the transducer to update the coordinate string as you step
      from each tile to the next. These transducers are
      ideally
deterministic
, generating a unique output
      coordinate string given any legal input. But not every
      substitution system admits a deterministic transducer: different
      systems describing the same actual
tiling
may or may
      not unambiguously identify the neighbouring coordinates of every
      tile in every situation.
What do you do if your substitution system
doesn’t
work with this technique? In the past, I’ve had to depend on
      luck. Some systems I wanted to use happened to work already; in
      cases where the system I started with didn’t work, someone else
      found an alternative system that did (though I think that was
      luck too, and this wasn’t the property they were specifically
      after).
In this article I’m going to talk about a technique for solving
      the problem without needing to depend on luck: if you have an
      ambiguous substitution system, you can
construct
a
      variation of it which is unambiguous, and make a transducer out
      of that instead.
Recap
I just said that there’s more to recap every time from previous
      articles. But it’s not
quite
true, because some of
      those articles contained ideas that I’ve now decided are
      superseded by better thoughts I had later. If you were to go
      back and re-read the whole lot, there would be entire sections
      I’d recommend skipping. So here I’ll try to summarise
      the
useful
parts.
This whole project has focused on tilings of the plane
      generated by
substitution systems
. A substitution
      system is a set of rules that allow you to turn each tile of
      tiling
A
into a cluster of tiles in tiling
B
, in a
      consistent way (each
type
of tile is transformed into
      the same cluster every time), and also specifies how those
      clusters fit next to each other when they’re expanded from
      neighbouring tiles. (Examples from previous
      articles:
Penrose
,
Spectre
,
hats
,
hats
      done differently
.)
So in principle – in the ideal world of mathematics where
      infinite processes can be imagined – you can take an entire
      infinite tiling of the plane, and apply these substitution rules
      to make a different complete tiling derived from the first one.
      I’ve been calling this ‘expansion’; mathematicians often say
      ‘deflation’.
More practically, you can take just
one
tile, and
      expand it repeatedly via the substitution system to turn it into
      a large patch of your tiling. This is a common technique for
      actually generating patches of (say) Penrose tilings in
      software.
But this series of articles has been about a better approach.
      If you have a tiling that was (or could have
      been)
generated
by iterating a substitution system –
      and with the famous aperiodic tilings like Penrose and
      hats,
every
tiling of the plane has this property – you
      can describe the
combinatorial
position of a tile in
      terms of the substitution system, by describing its position in
      the hierarchy of expansions. First say what type the
      tile
T
0
itself is; then say how it was
      generated from its supertile
T
1
, by giving the
      type of
T
1
and also saying which tile
      is
T
0
in the cluster of multiple tiles
      expanded from
T
1
. Then describe
      how
T
1
was generated from its
      parent
T
2
in turn, via another (tile type,
      subtile index) pair, and so on.
Once you have a string of ‘combinatorial coordinates’
      describing a tile
T
, it turns out that you can calculate
      the coordinates of a neighbouring tile
U
by several
      algorithms I’ve described in previous articles, all of which
      operate only on the string of coordinates, without having to
      think about geometry at all. So you can generate a patch of
      tiling that occupies a given region of the plane by generating
      each tile on demand as you find you need it, which is much more
      efficient than generating a much larger piece of tiling and then
      throwing most of its tiles away.
The
first
      of these algorithms
is recursive: ascend the hierarchy until
      you find a single supertile whose expansion contains
      both
T
and
U
, so that the coordinates of
T
and
U
are identical from that point onwards; then unwind
      the algorithm’s stack, generating the new set of low-order
      coordinates that describe
U
. The low-order part of this
      procedure’s output tells you which type of tile
U
actually is, and which edge of
T
is adjacent to which
      edge of
U
, so you know what tile to draw where in your
      output diagram. Then the rest of the output coordinate string
      contains enough information to run the algorithm again to step
      to
U
’s neighbour in turn, and so on.
You can use that recursive algorithm directly in simple cases,
      but I prefer a more sophisticated technique based on finite
      state machines, which requires more setup but is faster and
      simpler at run time, and can also handle special cases in which
      the recursion would never terminate. The first step of that is
      to use data obtained from the recursive algorithm to
build
a
      thing I call an ‘adjacency recogniser’. That’s a finite state
      machine which takes the coordinates of
two
tiles
T
and
U
, as if combined by
      Python
zip()
, and accepts or rejects depending on
      whether the two coordinate strings describe neighbouring
      tiles.
You can also
imagine
the adjacency recogniser as a state
      machine which takes
T
alone as input, by reinterpreting
      the input
U
as output. But this state machine is
      nondeterministic: there isn’t a unique output for all possible
      inputs. So next you try to
transform it
into
      a
deterministic
finite-state transducer, and see if
      that works.
A deterministic transducer, if you can build one, is my current
      gold standard for the best way to generate patches of tiling.
      It’s fast, simple (once you’ve built it), never needs to
      backtrack, and can
      cross
‘infinite-order
      supertile’ boundaries
– a phenomenon that comes up in
      special cases of these tilings, where no finitely large
      supertile contains any two tiles on opposite sides of the
      boundary. The recursive algorithm can’t handle a case like that
      at all, but a deterministic transducer can bypass one of those
      boundaries effortlessly, and find the unique infinite-order
      supertile that fits to the far side in such a way that every
      patch of tiling along the border is consistent with how the
      tiles normally fit together.
But for some systems
        you
can’t
        build a deterministic transducer
, because not every
        infinite-order supertile boundary
has
a unique
        neighbour: there exists some infinite string of coordinates
        which describes only part of the plane, and
multiple
options for what goes on the other side. I call a substitution
        system of this kind
ambiguous
.
Ambiguous substitution
      systems
In previous articles, I’ve shown two cases of this kind of
      ambiguity.
One
      occurred
in the original HTPF system of metatiles for the
      hat
      tiling;
the
      other
was in the minimalist H
7
/ H
8
substitution system for the Spectre tiling. In each case,
      there’s an infinite-order supertile boundary (shown as a thick
      line in the diagrams), with one side of the boundary fixed, and
      multiple possibilities for the other side.
To refresh your memory, here’s the hat example again:
The two possible infinite hat supertiles that can go with (F, 5)
Refining the set of tile types
What do you do if you want to use a deterministic transducer on
      one of those tilings? In both cases, my previous articles
      provide an answer: you can switch to a substitution system very
      like the previous one, but with additional types of tile. I’m
      going to call this a
refinement
of the previous
      system.
In the HTPF case, I presented
      a
substitution system
      of my own
, which I called “HHTPFFF”. It looks just
      like
the
      non-overlapping version of the standard HTPF system
, except
      that the H tile type has been cloned into two subtypes H0 and
      H1, and the F tile has been cloned into three, F0, F1 and F2.
      (And the difficult part, which is mostly what I’m going to end
      up discussing in this article, is deciding which version of H
      and F should appear in which expansion diagrams.)
Substitution rules for the HHTPFFF hat system
If you’re using
this
system, then what happens to the
      HTPF coordinate sequence that led to the ambiguity? The sequence
      in question was (F,5) repeated endlessly: that is, an F metatile
      which is child #5 of a larger F in turn, and so on forever. But
      in the more detailed HHTPFFF system, now you have to
      say
which
kind of F metatile you mean: you can either
      have an F0 which is child #5 of another F0 forever, or an F1
      which is child #5 of another F1. (There’s no third option
      involving type F2, because child #5 of F2 is an F1, not another
      F2.)
And whichever of those options you pick, the HHTPFFF system
      only allows
one
possibility for the coordinates of the
      tile on the far side of the boundary. So we’ve removed the
      ambiguity, by forcing the user to specify which version of (F,5)
      they meant.
The same two hat tilings, specified in the HHTPFFF system.
Each tile shows its containing metatile type and a hat index within that metatile.
(Of course, this doesn’t mean that only one set of tiles
      fits
physically
to the far side of the boundary. The
      infinite supertiles (F0,5) and (F1,5) occupy exactly the same
      shape of region in the plane, so each one fits perfectly to the
      other one’s official neighbouring supertile. But if you fit one
      to the wrong neighbour, the tile types aren’t consistent across
      the border: pairs of adjacent tiles occur which are never seen
      in any finitely large patch expanded from a single metatile.
      Transducers insist on maintaining
that
type of
      consistency.)
In the case of the Spectre H
7
/ H
8
system, I didn’t even have to make up a substitution system of
      my own. The discoverers of the Spectre tiling had long since
      done it for me: the system of 9 hexagonal metatiles in the
      original Spectre paper essentially
is
a refinement of
      the H
7
/ H
8
system. And it’s already
      unambiguous in this sense, so it allows a transducer to be
      constructed.
Making refined substitution systems from
      scratch
When I wrote the previous articles, I didn’t know
how
to construct an unambiguous refinement of an ambiguous
      substitution system.
That seems like an odd thing to say, given that I just said
      I
had
constructed one myself – the HHTPFFF system. But
      I didn’t do it from scratch: I had help. Bowen Ping and Brad
      Klee had already
      discovered
a completely
      different unambiguous system for hats
involving 10 types of
      hexagonal metatile. I derived the HHTPFFF system by looking at
      the correspondence between HTPF and those 10 hexagon types, and
      spotting that the H metatile in one system didn’t always
      correspond to the same group of hexagons in the other – there
      were two different clusters of hexagons occupying the space of
      an H metatile, and three different clusters corresponding to an
      F.
In other words, I made an unambiguous HTPF-like system by
      combining the original HTPF system with another system that was
      already unambiguous. I didn’t
create
the lack of
      ambiguity: I just copied it from one place to another.
In fact, I had previously
tried
to make an
      HHTPFFF-type system from scratch by hand, when I first
      discovered HTPF’s ambiguity. I was attempting exactly this kind
      of thing: split each tile into multiple types and somehow figure
      out which ones have to appear where in which expansion diagrams.
      I didn’t manage to solve the problem by hand. In fact, I
      eventually began to suspect it wasn’t possible, and gave up
      trying.
But it
was
possible, as it turned out. I just hadn’t
      found it by manually searching the large space of possible
      refinements, and I didn’t know of any principled approach to
      finding it
without
having to search a large space.
Well, now I do know! In fact, better than that: I’ve automated
      the process. I’ve found an
algorithm
, and implemented
      it in software, which can make an unambiguous version of a
      substitution system, given an ambiguous one as input.
At least, it’s worked on every ambiguous system I’ve tried so
      far, including an extra-awkward one I made up myself.
Clues to the secret
I’ll start by describing the clues that gave me the idea I
      ended up with.
After I published the previous article including a
      specification of the HHTPFFF tiling, I had a response on
      Mastodon
      from
mathBlock
,
      who had been studying a different property of the HTPF tiles,
      which they called
      “
drainage
”
      – if I haven’t totally misunderstood, it was about interpreting
      the tile outlines as contour lines and imagining how rivers of
      water would run down them. mathBlock had found that the HTPF
      metatile system didn’t provide quite enough information to
      determine the drainage: P metatiles always behaved in a
      consistent way, but F metatiles could do more than one thing,
      depending on where they appeared in the tiling. It turned out
      that my division of the F metatiles into F0, F1 and F2 seemed to
      match up to the different drainage behaviours.
I must admit that I never quite fully understood what the idea
      of drainage was useful for. But I know that what it
was
had to do with the neighbourhood of the tiles. What
      distinguishes the F0, F1 and F2 metatiles is: after you expand
      each one into two hats, look
      at
two
      particular convex vertices
of the resulting shape. Each one
      either meets two convex vertices of other hats, or meets a
      concave vertex of a single hat. Depending on which of those
      vertices do which, the metatile is either F0, F1 or F2.
      Similarly, a single vertex on the edge of the expansion of the H
      metatile into hats distinguishes H0 from H1.
In fact, it turns out that in each case there’s
      only one way that the neighbouring hat or hats around that
      vertex can be oriented. For example, here are the three subtypes
      of F, with the neighbouring hats around those vertices shown:
The three subtypes of F, and their forced hat
        neighbours around two particular vertices
We can check those diagrams against the ambiguous pair of (F,5)
      tilings I showed earlier. Here are those ambiguous tilings
      again, this time zoomed in to show the two hats expanded from
      the ‘central’ F metatile (the one which is child #5 of another F
      all the way up), with the two critical vertices marked as shown
      in the diagrams above:
Detail of the ambiguous supertile boundary, with
        crucial F vertices marked
You can see that the hats on the other side of the boundary
      meet this F metatile in a way that’s consistent with the
      diagrams here. When the F metatile is an F1, the marked vertex
      of its hat #0 meets a concave corner of a hat (as it happens,
      labelled H0.0); when it’s F0, the same vertex meets convex
      corners of two hats (P.1 and H1.2). Meanwhile, the marked vertex
      of hat #1 meets convex corners of two hats in both cases, as
      we’d also expect from the previous diagrams (it would only meet
      a concave corner in the F2 subtype). So this even shows
      us
how
specifying the subtype of F tile has
      disambiguated the far side of the boundary: of the two
      possibilities, each is only consistent with one of F0 and
      F1.
So this was my first clue that in one of these refined tilings,
      the subtype of a tile is related in some way to
what its
      neighbouring tiles are
.
What about the Spectre 9-hex system, which is pretty much a
      disambiguating refinement of the H
7
/ H
8
system?
The same is true there. In fact, the original Spectre paper
      says outright that the 9 hexagon types were
derived
by
      looking at the neighbourhood of each tile in the overall
      tiling.
And this also makes perfect sense from first principles. What
      problem were we originally trying to solve? The existence of a
      tile coordinate with more than one possible neighbour. How might
      you solve that? By making two (or more) copies of the tile and
      simply
ruling
that each one is only allowed to have a
      certain kind of neighbour. The F0 tile is the one which can be
      next to an H tile
this
way round, and not
that
way round; the F1 tile,
vice versa
.
That sounds like a pretty short thought process, now that I
      write it down. But initially these thoughts were very vague.
      (Not to mention that I’d forgotten that detail from the Spectre
      paper, and had to go and read it again before I noticed it!) I
      turned them over in my head for months before becoming gradually
      more confident that this was an idea that would work. Then I had
      to get from the general idea of ‘look at the neighbourhoods of
      the tiles’ to a concrete plan for how to determine those
      neighbourhoods and exactly what to do about them. And even then
      I didn’t get round to trying it, until I heard of another
      ambiguous substitution system that I wanted to try it on.
Neighbourhood-based refinement
The idea I settled on, as a technique for automated tiling
      refinement, was to make subtypes of each tile based on
      its
whole
neighbourhood. For each tile type in your
      original system, make a lot of clones of it, one for each
      possible pattern of
all
of its neighbouring tiles.
      Initially, by ‘neighbouring tiles’, I mean: for each edge of the
      tile, what type of tile is on the other side of that edge, and
      in what orientation?
As a worked example, I’m going to use a substitution system I
      haven’t shown in these articles before, because it’s usually too
      simple to be interesting, but here it’s just the right size to
      not be overwhelming. It’s the “chair” substitution system from
      Chaim Goodman-Strauss’s 1999 paper
      “
Aperiodic
      hierarchical tilings
”. The chair system has just one type of
      tile, and a single substitution rule that tiles a chair with
      four half-sized chairs:
The substitution rule for the chair tiling
(The chair tile isn’t an
aperiodic tile
, in the way
      that hats or Spectres are. It
can
tile the plane
      non-periodically, but it doesn’t
force
non-periodicity:
      there are also periodic tilings using the same tile type. But
      the particular tilings generated by this substitution system are
      hierarchical rather than periodic.)
So our first task is to analyse this substitution system to
      find every possible way that a chair tile can be surrounded by
      other tiles, and make a different subtype of the chair tile for
      each pattern. In this case, it turns out that there are seven
      different patterns, shown here:
The seven different neighbourhoods of a chair
        tile
To be clear, those aren’t
all
of the possible patterns
      of chair tiles that can possibly surround another chair. They’re
      not even all the possible patterns that can arise in the context
      of a tiling of the whole plane. But they’re all the patterns
      that can arise in a tiling
generated by iterating this
      substitution
– they were found by analysing the
      substitution system itself, and only considering possibilities
      that that system can generate.
The above analysis tells us what subtypes need
      to
exist
. But in order to completely specify the
      refined system, we must also look at the expansion of each tile
      into smaller tiles, and for each smaller tile, specify which
      clone of the original type it is.
To do that, we look at the original tile, and whatever
      neighbours a particular subtype assigns it; expand all of those
      into their subtiles via the original substitution system; and
      then, typically, that’s enough information to find all the
      neighbours of the subtiles we need to know.
For example, let’s take the above diagram for chair type 1 and
      its neighbours; expand all the tiles in the diagram into
      subtiles; and then we can determine the type of each of the
      central chair’s subtiles, based on its neighbours.
Deciding the subtypes of smaller chairs for a type-1
        larger chair
If we do that for the other six tile types too, we end up with
      this complete 7-tile substitution system:
The chair tiling after refinement
And if we feed this refined version of the chair tiling to my
      transducer-building code, it works! The original chair tiling
      didn’t admit a transducer, but the refined one does.
Why didn’t the original tiling admit a transducer? Because
      there exists at least one infinite supertile boundary where it’s
      ambiguous what’s on the far side. Here’s one: expand a chair
      into four chairs, at every stage keeping the bottom right corner
      fixed, so that you occupy one quadrant of the plane.
Building up an infinite supertile of chairs
In the refined system, in order to describe that infinite
      supertile in the first place, you have to choose
      which
subtype
of chair you’re talking about at every
      level. Chair types 3 and 7 are the only two types that ever
      appear in the bottom right of another chair, and each of those
      has a bottom right subtile of the same type as itself. So you
      have the choice of a type-3 chair with type-3 supertiles
      forever, or a type-7 one with type-7 supertiles.
Either way, the ambiguity is removed, because each of those
      tile types embodies a strong opinion about what must appear to
      its bottom right. In the neighbourhood diagrams above, you can
      see that the type-3 chair tile appears ‘back to back’ with two
      other chairs, adjacent to each along a whole long edge. But the
      type-7 tile nestles in the concave corner of another chair. And
      in the diagrams below, if you look at the tile at the bottom
      right corner of the top-left quadrant, you can see that the same
      is true: when it’s type 3, there are two more type 3s
      back-to-back with it on the far side of the supertile boundary,
      but when it’s type 7, there’s a type 4 cuddling its corner.
Tilings containing the two disambiguated versions of
        that infinite supertile
Similarly to previous cases
      (
Spectre
,
hat
      10-hex
), we can see that the far side of the boundary
      doesn’t have the same infinite supertile structure in both
      cases. In the type 3 version of the picture, four identical
      supertiles meet back to back in a 4-way symmetric tiling of the
      plane; in the type 7 version, the supertile we started with
      occupies one quadrant of the plane, and a single neighbour
      supertile occupies the other three quadrants. (That other
      supertile is constructed in a very similar way to the first one,
      except that we keep the
concave
vertex of the chair
      fixed at every stage instead of the bottom right vertex.)
Also similarly to previous cases, we see that
most
of
      the variable side of the boundary doesn’t actually vary! Almost
      all the chair tiles are the same in both diagrams, with the only
      changed ones being along a small number of narrow paths – in
      this case, three of the four diagonals out from the centre of
      the tiling (excluding the one in the top left, which belongs to
      the fixed supertile we started with).
That diagram is my excuse for this article’s terrible pun
      title, incidentally. We had a substitution system we couldn’t
      make a transducer for, meaning we couldn’t find out what was on
      the other side of that infinite supertile boundary; then we
      applied our shiny new algorithm to refine the tiling, and that
      enabled us to build a transducer and use it to cross the
      barrier. Perhaps more specifically, it became possible to cross
      the barrier once we’d distinguished
which
of two very
      similar barriers it actually was. So it
was
a refinable
      frontier, so there.
Reducing the set of subtypes
That’s proved the concept, at least. This refinement technique
      seems to
work
: it produces a version of the original
      tiling which allows a deterministic transducer to be
      constructed, even if the original tiling didn’t. (I have no
      proof that it works in all possible cases, but at this stage
      it’s worked in one, and that’s one more than I previously knew
      how to do!)
But you end up with a
lot
of tile subtypes. The reason
      I used the chair tiling as my example in the previous section is
      that anything bigger wouldn’t have fitted. The results of
      running this algorithm on the HTPF system delivers a set
      of
21 tile types
in total: 7 kinds of H, 5 kinds of P
      and 8 kinds of F (but still only one kind of T). And
      we
know
that’s more than we need, because I’d already
      found the HHTPFFF system, with only one kind of P, and two H and
      three F!
Looking at the output, one thing I immediately noticed was that
      some of the output tile types had exactly the
same
expansion as each other. For example, in the chair tiling shown
      above, chair types 1, 2 and 3 all expand to exactly the same
      pattern, and so do types 5, 6 and 7.
So that led to the idea: what if we postprocess the refined
      system by merging tile types that have identical expansions?
This
shouldn’t
reintroduce ambiguity, because the aim
      is to distinguish what happens at the
lowest
level, in
      the final output tiling, and higher-order supertiles are only
      interesting in what they eventually expand to. (A handwave
      rather than a proof, but enough to make it look worth a
      try.)
Of course, merging some tile types might make
further
expansion diagrams identical, if they only differed in subtile
      types which we just merged into one. So we iterate the merging
      process if necessary, until we reach a fixed point.
For example, after re-merging those sets of identical subtypes
      in the chair tiling, the 7 subtypes of chair tile are reduced to
      only 3:
The chair tiling after refinement and reduction
The reduced set of tile types no longer
      encapsulate
all
the information about each tile’s
      neighbourhood. But they still contain just enough of it to make
      a transducer work. To prove it, here are the same two tilings as
      above, regenerated using the reduced system:
The two chair tilings from above, in the reduced system
(I have to admit that the rainbow versions of these pictures in
      the previous section were prettier! But the system with fewer
      tile types is more practical.)
You might wonder: what do these reduced types
mean?
We
      had a clear idea what the original seven chair subtypes meant:
      each one went with a specific diagram of how the chairs around
      it were arranged. But now that we’ve merged some of those
      subtypes into one, what information does a merged subtype
      convey, apart from ‘the tiles around it can be in one of [this
      potentially long list of patterns]’?
I think the answer is that a reduced tile type still tells
      you
something
about the neighbourhood of the original
      tile – but it doesn’t tell you everything about what
      tiles
of the same size
surround it. Instead, we’ve
      narrowed down to only saying something about the
      surrounding
smaller
tiles, at the next expansion level
      down. You can see an example of this
in an
      earlier section
, where I showed the three subtypes of F in
      the HHTPFFF tiling: choosing one of those three subtypes doesn’t
      nail down exactly what
metatiles
surround the F, but it
      does tell you something about which
hats
surround it.
      And not even on all sides: only at a small number of positions
      where the answers are crucial to telling the difference between
      something important.
Trying it out on real aperiodic tilings
This is all very well, and has given us a pretty picture or
      two, but the chair tiling isn’t all that interesting, because
      it’s not a
real
aperiodic tile: there are plenty of
      other ways to tile the plane with chairs which aren’t derived
      from the substitution system above, and many of those are
      periodic. In that respect it’s unlike Penrose tilings, or hats,
      or Spectres, which all have the property that the
only
ways you can tile the plane with those tiles are derived from
      their substitution systems. So those are the interesting ones to
      study.
So, now we’ve got a refinement algorithm that works on a small
      toy example of an ambiguous substitution system, how does it do
      when run on the cases we actually care about?
Answer: it does brilliantly!
The auto-refiner rediscovers HHTPFFF from
      first principles
As I mentioned above, when I ran the
first
stage of
      this refinement algorithm on the HTPF system of hat metatiles,
      it divided each metatile type into many more subtypes than
      necessary (apart from T, which remained unique). We got seven
      kinds of H, five P, and eight F, making 21 types of metatile in
      total.
But when I ran the postprocessing reduction pass,
most
of those subtypes ended up merging with each other again. Guess
      how many we ended up with?
We ended up with exactly
seven
tile types: the single
      T, two H, three F, and back down to a single P.
And that’s exactly the same set of tile types as in the HHTPFFF
      system I’d already found without this refinement algorithm. This
      automated analysis can do in a fraction of a second what I spent
      weeks failing to do in 2023: starting from
only
the
      HTPF system itself, it’s able to construct an unambiguous,
      transducer-capable refinement of it, without needing any input
      from someone who had already discovered an unambiguous
      substitution system of any other kind. Moreover, it finds
      exactly the
same
one: no pointless extra tile
      types. (On
either
side.)
It figures out the Spectre 9-hex system too
I’ve already mentioned a second ambiguous substitution system:
      the H
7
/ H
8
substitution system for the
      Spectre tiling.
      In
the
      previous article
I used the ambiguity to zero in on one of
      the particularly interesting instances of the Spectre tiling.
To recap the H
7
/ H
8
substitution system:
      it contains just two types of metatile. One is just a single
      Spectre; the other is the ‘Mystic’, two Spectres oriented at a
      30° angle to each other and glued together into a double-sized
      tile. The expansion diagrams look like this:
Substitution rules for the Spectre H
7
/ H
8
system
A warning: these expansion diagrams are more complicated than
      they look, because – to put it mildly – it’s not obvious at all
      how the edges of the single Spectre or Mystic match up to the
      crinkly edges of the expansion. As well as the exterior spurs
      shown, there’s also an interior spur in the Mystic expansion,
      and even a section of boundary which is traversed
three
times, twice in one direction and once in the opposite direction
      in between. All of that detail is very difficult to show in a
      single diagram: if I labelled all the edges and sub-edges, as I
      did for
      the
HTPF
      system
in a previous article, the numbers would all overlap
      each other and it would still look horribly confusing. If you
      want to understand how the edges match up, my best suggestion is
      to go back to
      the
diagrams
      in my previous article
, where I showed the outline of each
      of these expansions being built up one edge at a time.
My
first
attempt to write the auto-refiner algorithm
      couldn’t handle this system at all, because when it was trying
      to find all the neighbour patterns it got stuck on even simple
      spurs – and this tiling has the worst spurs of all. Indeed, I
      wrote in an early commit message that this system (and its hat
      analogue) would be “the boss level” of the concept. But then I
      found a better way to do the analysis which doesn’t care about
      spurs, so I beat the boss fight in the end!
So my current refiner code runs quite happily, given this
      substitution system as input. It splits the plain Spectre
      metatile into eight versions, and leaves the Mystic unique, for
      a total of nine tile types. And it turns out that those nine
      tile types correspond
exactly
to the nine hexagon types
      described in the Spectre paper. I’ve shown the refined system
      here with my own Latin-alphabet labels for the tile types (and
      the original Greek ones too in the large tile pictures, in case
      that’s useful). And I’ve used the same colour scheme as I used
      in
my Spectre
      article in 2023
. So you can go back to that older article
      and easily check that all the expansion maps agree, if you
      want.
Substitution rules for the refined version of Spectre H
7
/ H
8
In other words, this automated algorithm has rediscovered
      exactly the Spectre 9-hex substitution system shown in the paper
      – except that it hasn’t bothered simplifying the
      tile
shapes
into hexagons. That wasn’t in its brief.
      The refiner’s job is to leave the tile shapes unchanged, and do
      nothing except make more versions of each tile type.
It doesn’t matter very much, either way. By the time you’ve
      built a transducer out of this system, the distinction between
      hexagonal metatiles and ones shaped like Spectres and Mystics
      has more or less vanished anyway. The lowest-level tiles (the
      actual Spectres) are the same in both systems, and the
      transducer has encapsulated all the
combinatorial
information about the metatiles, and didn’t care about their
      geometry in the first place. The two transducers are
      interchangeable – you can feed the same coordinate string to
      either, and it will give the same answers.
And now look what happens with hats!
Perhaps the most exciting result of this project was what
      happened when I ran the same refiner on the
      H
7
/ H
8
substitution system for
      the
hat
tiling.
That system is very similar to the Spectre one, in that it has
      two types of metatile, one of which is a single ordinary hat,
      and the other is a fusion of two, including the unusual
      reflected one. As with the Spectre case above, I’ve left the
      details of which edge is which out of this diagram (and for the
      same reason – it’s horribly confusing), but
      my
previous
      article
has the missing detail in full.
Substitution rules for the hat H
7
/ H
8
system
In the previous two cases, when I ran my automated refiner, the
      output had been exactly identical to an unambiguous substitution
      system I already knew about. Here, I did already know of an
      unambiguous system that corresponds closely to the
      H
7
/ H
8
system for hats: Bowen Ping and
      Brad Klee’s
system of
      10 hexagonal metatiles
. So I was expecting that my refiner
      would most likely recreate that from first principles, in the
      same way that it recreated both HHTPFFF and Spectre 9-hex.
But it surprised me, by doing
better!
The output of my
      refiner, run on Hat H
7
/ H
8
, is a system
      of only
eight
tile types in total – the unique
      double-hat metatile and 7 subtypes of the single hat.
Substitution rules for the refined hat H
7
/ H
8
system
Is this a mistake, and the refined system doesn’t admit a
      transducer? Of course that was the first thing I checked, but
      no, the transducer construction works fine.
So, how has my just-written algorithm managed to
beat
Ping and Klee’s system of ten tile types?
An obvious way to answer that question would be to match up the
      tile types in this system against the ones in the 10-hex
      diagrams. Unfortunately, they don’t quite match correctly,
      because as I mentioned in
      the
previous
      article
, there are actually
two
ways you can set up
      the H
7
/ H
8
system for hats, depending on
      which neighbour you fuse the reflected hat with – and my
      presentation of Ping and Klee’s 10-hex system, unfortunately,
      happened to pick the other one from the one in the hats paper,
      before I realised there was a right way to make that decision.
(Ping and Klee’s
own
presentation of their system was
      even stranger: it sawed the reflected hat in two, and assigned
      half of it to
each
of the neighbouring tiles! So this
      poor choice was mine, and not theirs.)
Running the refiner again on the
other
version of
      H
7
/ H
8
also generates 8 tile types rather
      than 10, and this time, it is possible to match them up one by
      one to the 10-hex system and see what happened. It turns out
      that the refiner has merged the B and C hex types into a single
      “BC” tile, and similarly, merged the G and J hexes into one “GJ”.
If you go back and look in detail at
      the
10-hex
      diagrams
, it is true that the B and C hexes expand to the
      same pattern of other
hexagons
. But the
edges
match up differently: the B hex has a spur sticking out of its
      expansion, and the details of how the edges of the original
      hexagon map to the crinkly edge of the expansion are quite
      different from each other. Similarly, G and J expand to the same
      pattern of hexagons but with different edge mappings. In the
      final mapping to hats, the B and C hexagons don’t work the same
      as each other either, and neither do G and J.
But in the H
7
/ H
8
, there
are
only two edge types in the whole system, corresponding to the
      long and short edges of hats. So in that system, the B and C
      tile types are
completely
identical, because the
      difference in edge types isn’t there. They’re just two tiles of
      the same shape with the same expansion. And similarly for G and
      J.
So it
looks
, to me, as if the reason my refiner
      managed to get away with fewer tile types is
      actually
because
it left the tile shapes as hats (and
      the fused double-hat), and didn’t try to simplify them to
      hexagons with lots of different edge types. It seems to me that
      that simplification to hexagons creates extra complication!
By some measure, this is now the most economical substitution
      system for hats that I know of, among those which admit an
      unambiguous transducer at all. It uses only 8 metatile types,
      compared to Ping and Klee’s 10. The HHTPFFF system gets away
      with one fewer – only 7 in total – but its metatiles are larger,
      with most of them expanding to 2 hats, and the two H metatiles
      expanding to 4. If you measure the system’s overall complexity
      by “total number of hats in the expansion of all lowest-order
      metatiles” – a metric that I only just made up but which seems
      to account for both types of complexity reasonably well – then
      this system is now the winner, at 9 hats total, to 11 for Ping
      and Klee’s hexagons or 17 for HHTPFFF.
Just to demonstrate this 8-tile system in action, here are the
      two 6-way singular hat tilings from
      the
previous
      article
, regenerated using a transducer made from it.
      (They’re also the same pair of hat tilings shown in the example
      at the top of
this
article, although there, I was
      focusing on the ambiguity for transducer purposes, rather than
      the six-way near-symmetry.) In terms of the new tiling system,
      one of these contains a type-2 hat tile which is the subtile of
      another type-2 hat forever, and the other contains a type-3 hat
      similarly. (In both cases, the subtile’s position within the
      supertile’s expansion is always the bottom right hat in the
      diagrams above.)
Two six-way singular hat tilings, generated using the 8-tile refinement of H
7
/ H
8
Difficult cases
I left a loose end somewhere back up there. My refinement
      algorithm starts by splitting each tile into subtypes depending
      on its neighbourhood, and I said that “initially” the
      neighbourhood would be defined as the tile on the other side of
      each edge (including which way round it is).
The main property we need from the concept of a “neighbourhood”
      is:
given the neighbourhood of a supertile, we need to be
      able to determine the neighbourhoods of all its subtiles
.
      For example, in the
example above
, I
      showed how you do this for a particular subtype of chair tile:
      draw in all the nearby large tiles according to the supertile’s
      type, and since all the smaller tiles bordering on each subtile
      are contained within those larger tiles, that’s enough
      information to know the type of every smaller tile.
But I wasn’t completely confident that that would be enough
      information in
every
case. It worked fine for all the
      tilings I’ve discussed above, but I could see a way it
      might
not
work, in principle.
Again it has to do with those awkward zero-thickness spurs that
      sometimes poke out of tile expansions. What if a tile
X
has its neighbour on a particular edge being tile
Y
, but
      when both are expanded into subtiles, the part of
Y
’s
      expansion bordering
X
turns out to be nothing but a
      zero-thickness spur? Then, if you were trying to ask our
      recursive coordinate transition algorithm what was on the other
      side of a particular edge of a subtile of
X
, it might
      find the spur, and then have to recurse back out of the other
      side of it to find out what the
next
large tile was.
      And that might not be one of
X
’s immediate edge-to-edge
      neighbours at all.
This hasn’t come up yet in any ‘real’ aperiodic tile system.
      Any spur creates a situation where it
nearly
happens.
      But usually, the tile whose spur is adjacent to some edge
      of
X
also has some nonzero-thickness part of its
      expansion adjacent to another part of
X
’s edge, which
      means that in spite of the spur you
do
still have
      enough information to find out everything you need.
But I couldn’t rule out this happening in some other more
      difficult tiling in future – and I wanted my algorithm to have
      an answer when it did. So I
invented
a substitution
      system designed deliberately to have this annoying property, and
      then used it as a test case to make sure my code could cope.
The ‘Awkward Squares’ substitution system
The substitution I devised is a thing I called ‘Awkward
      Squares’. That was just the working filename I assigned it when
      I started trying to write one: I wanted it to be awkward to my
      refinement algorithm. In fact it ended up even more awkward than
      I’d expected, so I decided it was a
good
name, and
      could stay.
The basic idea of Awkward Squares is that each tile is a simple
      square. The squares come in two colours, red and blue. Both
      types of square expand to two red and two blue squares, but in
      one case, horizontally adjacent pairs of squares are the same
      colour, and in the other, vertically adjacent.
Substitution rules for the Awkward Squares system
This would be extremely boring, except for that spur poking out
      at the bottom. That’s the awkward part: I did something
      deliberately silly with the edge mappings.
To begin with, I assigned the horizontal and vertical edges
      different
types
, so that each one could be expanded
      into sub-edges in a different way:
An Awkward Square, with colours and orientations marked on its edges
There are two distinct edge types here: the horizontal edges
      (drawn in green, with one arrow), and the vertical edges (in
      purple with two arrows). Both edge types have a direction, so
      that traversing them backwards reverses the order of the
      sub-edges they expand into.
The edge types and arrows also function as matching rules: they
      constrain the squares in the tiling to join together with the
      same type of edges meeting each other, and the arrows pointing
      in the same direction. In this case, the effect is simply to
      keep all the squares the same way up: rotating one square
      relative to another isn’t allowed. (So far, still nothing
      awkward – that’s going out of its way to be
simple!
)
To expand one square into a square of twice the edge length,
      the obvious thing would be to expand a horizontal edge into two
      horizontal edges end to end, and similarly for vertical edges.
      But instead, I’ve done something different. A horizontal edge
      expands into two horizontal edges
and a vertical
      one
.
On the other hand, the vertical edge behaves normally,
      expanding to two vertical edges as you’d expect:
The rules for expanding horizontal and vertical
        Awkward Square edges
So when you expand a square, you still
do
get a larger
      square which can contain four of the smaller squares:
Expansion of an Awkward Square outline, one edge at
        a time
But the effect of the knight’s-move expansion of the horizontal
      edge is that the next Awkward Square to the
right
of
      this one will be placed one (smaller) square lower down, because
      in that expansion of the edges, the right-hand vertical edge has
      to start below the baseline of the output square, where the
      expansion of the bottom horizontal edge ended. So that’s the
      part that matches up with the left edge of the next square.
You can also see that in the expansion diagrams above: the
      large circular blobs in the expansion of the R and B tile types
      show where the images of the original square’s vertices are. And
      those are the points which must match between one tile and the
      next.
So, suppose you know the types of all four
      neighbours
L
,
R
,
U
,
D
of an Awkward
      Square
S
of one size. Then here’s what it tells you about
      the next size down:
An Awkward Square with four neighbours, and its
        expansion
What’s on the right-hand side of the S3 sub-square? Or on the
      left-hand side of S0? You
can’t
answer this if all you
      know is which type of tile each of
L
,
R
,
U
,
      and
D
is. To tell what’s on the right of S3, you’d need
      to know the type of the larger tile diagonally adjacent
      to
S
, to the right of
U
and above
R
.
      Similarly, you also need to know what’s below
L
and left
      of
D
.
Formally
, what’s immediately on the right of S3 is the
      spur poking downwards from the expansion of the U square.
      Similarly, to the left of S0 is the downward spur from the L
      square. It’s just that that doesn’t help us find out the
      identity of the
smaller squares
that must exist there
      in a full tiling.
So this is exactly an example of the scenario I suggested at
      the top of this section: we try to find out what’s to the right
      of the S3 subtile, we find it’s a zero-thickness spur of one of
      the neighbouring supertiles, and then we need to know what’s on
      the
other
side of that spur before we can answer the
      original question.
Extendable list of queries
My solution to this was to rewrite the part of the algorithm
      that determines all the necessary information about a tile to
      decide on its subtype.
In the initial version of the algorithm, that code simply
      looped over each edge, finding out what was on the far side of
      the edge. Now it has a list of more general
queries
that it needs to answer about a tile.
Of course, the initial list of queries is exactly the same as
      before: what’s on the far side of each edge? That’s
      the
minimum
information needed to determine a tile’s
      subtype.
But then, another piece of code is asked to determine the types
      of the child tiles expanded from a parent. And the
only
thing it’s told about the parent tile is the list of answers to
      the current set of queries. From that alone, it must answer all
      the same queries about the child tiles.
In the case of the Awkward Squares system, it will find that it
      can’t answer, for the reason shown in the previous section: if
      all you know is what large tiles borders the parent along its
      edges, you can’t always know what smaller tiles border the
      children along
their
edges. So the ‘determine the child
      subtypes’ code will fail to return an answer – and instead, it
      will return a description of the question it
tried
to
      ask about the parent tile which wasn’t answered.
These questions will in general be conditional on an answer to
      a previous question. For example, the question ‘What’s on the
      other side of parent edge 3?’ might give a tile type as answer
      which tells the code it must ask about some edge
      of
that
tile in turn. So its new question will be along
      the lines of ‘Given that the question about parent edge 3 turned
      out to be edge 5 of a type-
foo
tile, what’s on the other
      side of edge 4 of
that?
’. In cases where the question
      about parent edge 3 has a different answer, the answer to that
      would be
None
, or whatever form of ‘not applicable’
      is appropriate to the programming language.
(These followup queries have to be conditional on the previous
      queries, because in many substitution systems, tiles aren’t all
      the same shape. If you have to ask a followup question to
      traverse a spur, it will very likely be specific to the tile
      type. In Awkward Squares that doesn’t come up, because both
      square types have the same shape of expansion, but in that
      respect, it’s not as awkward as some systems!)
Unfortunately, once a new query is identified, everything the
      code
thought
it knew about the subtypes of tiles
      becomes invalid, because it doesn’t have the answer to the new
      query for any of them. So it must start all over again, this
      time including the new query in the list of things it wants to
      know, right from square one.
In the case of Awkward Squares, we end up with eight extra
      queries. Basically they’re the obvious two: what are the
      upper-right and lower-left diagonal neighbours of the original
      tile? But the query list has to be different for each original
      tile type (tiles don’t even necessarily have the same number of
      edges!), and for the type of each tile encountered in a previous
      query. So the 8 queries cover all combinations of the original
      tile type (red or blue), which neighbour we initially asked
      about, and which type it was.
Sometimes you have to refine more than
      once!
After adding those 8 queries, the refiner restarts from the
      beginning, runs successfully to completion, and outputs a
      refined tiling. There are quite a lot of tiles in it, as it
      turns out: nine copies of the blue tile, and eight copies of the
      red one.
(That surprised me for an instant – wouldn’t you expect the
      same number of each? But no: the substitution rules treat
      horizontal and vertical lines differently, so it shouldn’t be
      surprising that tiles behave differently if their expansions are
      rotated 90° so that horizontal and vertical interchange.)
The
real
surprise came when I tried to make a
      transducer out of this refined Awkward Squares tiling. It still
      didn’t work!
But all is not lost. On the theory that it was a very easy
      experiment and worth a try, I simply fed the refiner’s output
      straight back into
another
run of the refiner. This
      time, it cloned only four of the tile types, each into just two
      copies … and the output of the second run, the doubly-refined
      tiling,
does
successfully produce a transducer. Phew!
I don’t know that it will be particularly illuminating, but
      here’s an example of one of the most difficult ambiguities in
      the Awkward Squares tiling. This was an ambiguity that the
      transducer-building code reported was
still
present in
      the tiling system even after the first refinement, and only went
      away in the second one: you can see that the infinite supertile
      in the bottom left is the same in both pictures except that the
      top tile on its right-hand edge changes its label between B3.1
      and B3.2 – the two subtypes that the
second
refinement
      made out of the B3 tile generated by the first one.
Two Awkward Square tilings which the once-refined
        system still couldn’t tell apart.
Two-part tile types like
        B3.1 indicate that the second refinement split B3 into
        two.
I can’t make much sense of that myself – Awkward Squares didn’t
      include “readily comprehensible to humans” in its design goals!
      But it at least demonstrates the code to be doing what it said
      it did.
I was a bit surprised when the first run didn’t make the tiling
      unambiguous, but not
too
surprised. After all, “make it
      unambiguous” was not in the software’s actual instructions. All
      I
told
the algorithm to do was to bake some
      conveniently reachable information about each tile’s
      neighbourhood into the tile type. If that conveniently reachable
      information wasn’t enough to remove all ambiguities, well, who
      said it would be in the first place?
But if that
wasn’t
enough, then it does make
      reasonable sense to me that running the refiner again should
      help. Because the first run included information in each tile’s
      type about the
unrefined
types in its neighbourhood –
      and then the second run includes information in each tile’s type
      about the types in its neighbourhood
as augmented by the
      first refinement
. So each tile now includes information
      from an even wider radius of the original tiling.
My conjecture is that
some
number of refinement runs
      always ought to be enough. Rationale: any infinitely long string
      of combinatorial coordinates of a tile indicates not only its
      immediate type, but the type of all its larger and larger
      supertiles. The more you refine the substitution system, the
      more information is included about the
neighbouring
large supertiles. Eventually, surely, you’ll end up with the
      region determined by each coordinate growing on all sides, and
      then the union of all those regions must cover the whole plane –
      which is a sufficient criterion for the coordinate string
      unambiguously defining a single tiling of the whole plane, and
      not leaving any region less than fully determined.
But that’s a pretty handwavy argument, and also, I have no
      idea
how many
refinements might be needed! It was a
      surprise to me that the maximum number was more than 1. Is it
      bounded at all? Who knows!
The test case that wasn’t a test case
One last silly story:
When I was initially testing this refiner, the
      very
first
tiling I tested it on wasn’t the chair
      tiling shown above. It was
      the
Ammann-Beenker
      tiling
: an aperiodic system with two tile types, discovered
      around the same time as the Penrose tilings, but less famous.
One of the tiles in the Ammann-Beenker tiling is a rhombus with
      45° and 135° angles. Depending on your point of view, the other
      is either a square, or a pair of mirror-image right triangles
      which always join along their hypotenuses. I’ve seen both
      interpretations; I think the squares look nicer, but the
      triangles make an easier substitution system. (For much the same
      reason as sawing the Penrose tiles into two triangles – each
      tile’s expansion fills exactly the same area as the original
      tile.)
Just like the simple shapes in Penrose tilings, either of those
      shapes – or both together – could tile the plane periodically,
      if it weren’t for some matching rules, shown by the arrows on
      the edges below:
Substitution rules for Ammann-Beenker, with the square bisected
(If you prefer to think of the tiling as having one square
      instead of two triangles, then the double-arrow edges vanish
      completely, and you just have a square and a rhombus, with all
      edges being of the same type, and just different patterns of
      edge directions around the two tiles’ perimeters. Up to
      you.)
I’ve had this tiling description in my source repository for a
      year or more. My code wasn’t able to build a transducer from it,
      and I didn’t know how to solve that problem by myself, or know
      of any alternative substitution systems that might happen to
      eliminate the ambiguity. And it’s a small and simple system, so
      it made a good first test case – not too large,
and
if
      it worked I’d get rid of a long-standing annoyance.
So I ran my draft refiner over the Ammann-Beenker tiling, and
      it worked, and generated me a refined tiling that did admit a
      transducer. Success!
What do you do once you’ve built a transducer for a previously
      ambiguous tiling? You identify a specific ambiguous case from
      the unrefined substitution system, and use the new transducer to
      draw both versions of it, to demonstrate that you really have
      solved the problem. That’s what I did for the hat ambiguity, and
      further up this article I did the same for the chair tiling (and
      Awkward Squares).
But when I examined the transducer failure report to try to
      figure out the ambiguous case, I became suspicious. It didn’t
      seem to make sense.
In fact, it turned out that my transducer-construction code
      simply had a bug: it had
given up too soon
when trying
      to build this transducer. The
original
Ammann-Beenker
      system, without any refinement,
does
admit a transducer
      after all, and it was only a bug in my code that made me think
      it didn’t!
At that early stage, I hadn’t written the part of the algorithm
      which automatically re-merges tile subtypes. So I got an
      over-refined tiling with lots of subtypes of each tile type, and
      had to re-merge as many as I could by hand, reverting any change
      that broke the transducer again. By the time I’d finished that,
      I was back down to just one rhombus, and
two
squares;
      merging the last two squares caused the transducer construction
      to fail. But if I’d had the
automated
tile-merging code
      at the time, it would have merged the last two squares anyway,
      which might have made me suspicious sooner!
Well, regardless of that, the upshot is that now I
do
have a working Ammann-Beenker transducer, when previously I
      didn’t – even if the reason why wasn’t quite what I expected it
      to be. So I should show some pretty pictures made from it, in
      celebration. But I can’t triumphantly show the two versions of
      an ambiguous Ammann-Beenker instance, because as it turns out,
      there aren’t any. So instead I’ll just show a couple of
      particularly symmetric tilings, which also contain infinite
      supertile boundaries, so it takes a transducer to render them
      conveniently:
Two symmetric instances of the Ammann-Beenker tiling
This tiling is generated from the system shown above, with two
      rhombuses and a triangle, but I added a one-off mapping layer at
      the very bottom which maps one of the triangles to nothing and
      the other to a square. So the supertile boundaries ‘morally’
      ought to be straight, but they just swerve around each square
      they come to.
Conclusion
I’m very pleased with this piece of work! It’s a significant
      advance in the practical uses of substitution-tiling
      transducers. Now if I hear about a new substitution system and
      want to try generating instances of it, I don’t have to worry if
      it turns out to be ambiguous. I can just run my new refiner, and
      most likely get a disambiguated version of it, without needing
      anyone else to have done the clever part for me.
For
      example,
a
      July 2025 blog post by mathBlock
shows an interesting
      alternative substitution system for the hat tiling, which
      takes
two
iterations of deflation to have the same
      effect as a single deflation in any of the normal systems – that
      is, you can
half
-deflate a hat tiling, obtaining a
      tiling that’s intermediate between the original tiling and its
      full deflation. That struck me as an interesting thing to
      investigate: what happens if you half-deflate some of the
      special instances of the tiling, like
      the
rotationally
      symmetric ones
, or
      the
“singular”
      nearly-symmetric ones
? But when I coded up mathBlock’s
      system in the form of one of my tiling description files, I
      tried to build a transducer, and sadly, found it was
      ambiguous.
That was what inspired me to try out this refiner idea – and it
      worked, so I was able to produce an unambiguous refinement of
      mathBlock’s substitution, and use that for my investigations.
      (And it turns out that some of the symmetric and singular hat
      patterns half-deflate to
each other
, which is an
      interesting finding, and perhaps would have been an alternative
      way to
discover
the singular patterns!)
