---
title: "hyperbola :: LaTeX Escapism"
url: "https://hyperbo.la/w/LaTeX-escapism/"
fetched_at: 2026-04-29T07:02:15.356257+00:00
source: "hyperbola :: blog"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# hyperbola :: LaTeX Escapism

Source: https://hyperbo.la/w/LaTeX-escapism/

Many of my side projects take the shape of
over-engineered
. They serve as a
fun sandbox to go wild, put my mind on a treadmill, try new things, and take
maximum control of the outcome. 🏰
This tends to mean every project, no matter how small, has GitHub Actions CI,
lint passes,
prettier
-formatted READMEs,
dependabot
, a locked trunk branch
and PR-oriented merge workflow. There is always some sort of build system;
sometimes
Vite
, sometimes
Bazel
, sometimes
Cargo
, sometimes an
amalgamation of
make
and
docker
. 🏗️
My LaTeX Résumé
Nowhere is this energy more apparent than the repository that houses
my
résumé
. 🙋
I built my LaTeX résumé from scratch. I did not use a template; I started with
an empty buffer in
vim
. There are currently 102 lines of prelude before
\begin{document}
. The résumé uses the
scrartcl
document class and content
entries within each
\section*{}
are defined using custom environments. Early
versions of the source were built with pdfLaTeX, then later with XeLaTeX. The
current revision is built with LuaLaTeX. 📇
My résumé’s git respository has a build system.
make all
invokes
make
recursively in a Docker container to invoke
latexmk
(which itself invokes
make
for some dynamic
\inputA
includes). The PDFs and PNGs generated by this
build process are reproducible. 🪞
The
Dockerfile
installs a curated and minimal set of packages required to pull
in a lightweight TeX install. Line 40 regenerates the font cache as part of the
image baking process to speed up the PDF rendering step. 📚
# pregenerate font caches
RUN
set -eux; \
luatools --generate; \
mtxrun --script fonts --reload; \
luaotfload-tool --update
The sources run through several layers of linters:
check-style
runs on every
commit; custom scripts reject commits which contain non-ASCII characters
(preferring the LaTeX equivalent macros);
hadolint
ensures the
Dockerfile
follows all of the best practices (except for
DL3008
, I don’t have the
patience to pin
apt
package versions). ⏳
@dependabot
keeps Docker base images current with automatic dependency upgrade
PRs. GitHub Actions CI ensures the TeX source builds without warnings on every
commit. 🪜
I use GitHub releases with PDF artifacts to track which things end up getting
pushed to the web. Releases are tagged by date. 🏷️
The most recent hurdle I overcame was how to create blue underlined hyperlinks.
The sources are easy to work with. 😅
why tho
When I work on a side project, I am choosing to enter a box. Being able to
exercise this level of control lets me indulge into some escapism, exploration,
and
for the sake of it
engineering. 📦
