---
title: "IR is better than assembly"
url: "https://idea.popcount.org/2013-07-24-ir-is-better-than-assembly"
fetched_at: 2026-05-05T07:01:13.104257+00:00
source: "Marek Vavruša (idea.popcount)"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# IR is better than assembly

Source: https://idea.popcount.org/2013-07-24-ir-is-better-than-assembly

IR is better than assembly
24 July 2013
In
the LLVM
the compilation takes three stages (image from
the AOSA book
):
Schema
The stages are:
The
frontend
, parsing original language and spiting out LLVM
   Intermediate Representation (IR) code
1
.
The
optimiser
, mangling one IR into optimised equivalent
   IR. This stage does all the usual optimisations like constant
   propagation, dead code removal and so on.
The
backend
, taking IR and producing machine code optimised for
   a specific CPU.
The crucial part is IR. It's a common language that sits between the
high-level program and the low-level
backend
. IR is used to express
high level concepts and is specific enough that any
backend
can
produce a fast machine code.
IR is the heart of LLVM.
What is IR?
IR is a low-level programming language
,
pretty similar to assembly. From the AOSA book:
Unlike most RISC instruction sets, LLVM is strongly typed with a simple type system and some details of the machine are abstracted away. For example, the calling convention is abstracted through call and ret instructions and explicit arguments. Another significant difference from machine code is that the LLVM IR doesn't use a fixed set of named registers, it uses an infinite set of temporaries named with a % character.
IR code is usually generated by the
frontend
, but nothing stops us from
writing it by hand. Let's do it!
You'll need
clang
and LLVM (
llc
,
opt
):
$
sudo aptitude install llvm clang
C to IR
The learning curve for IR, like for any assembly, is a bit steep. When
starting with IR is it's easiest to compile a normal program, for
example in C, to IR. That can be done using an LLVM
frontend
. Once
we have IR we can tweak it and use an LLVM
backend
to produce a real
machine code.
Consider the following C code:
unsigned
square_int
(
unsigned
a
)
{
return
a
*
a
;
}
Using
clang
we can generate IR. Flag
-Os
makes sure the produced
IR is shortest and should be easiest to read:
$
clang -Os -S -emit-llvm sample.c -o sample.ll
After removing some unnecessary boilerplate we get:
define
i32
@square_unsigned
(
i32
%a
)
{
%1
=
mul
i32
%a
,
%a
ret
i32
%1
}
IR is strongly typed and you can see types being repeated
everywhere. In line 1 we define a function that takes a single
i32
parameter
%a
and returns type
i32
. In line 2 we assign the result
of multiplication to register
%1
and we return it in the next line.
For more details please see
the official documentation of the IR language
.
Optimising
If you wish, you can run LLVM optimisations manually. The tool
opt
can transform unoptimised IR to an optimised one. Our code is already
optimised, we used the
-Os
flag, but you can run
opt
anyway:
IR to machine code
Finally, given IR we can use a
backend
to generate a machine code
for a real CPU. Let's compile our IR:
$
llc-3.0 -O3 sample.ll -march
=
x86-64 -o sample-x86-64.s
This generates:
square_unsigned
:
imull
%edi, %
edi
        movl
%edi, %
eax
        ret
Fancy x86 32 bit assembler? Nothing simpler:
$
llc-3.0 -O3 sample.ll -march
=
x86 -o sample-x86.s
square_unsigned
:
movl
4
(
%esp), %
eax
        imull
%eax, %
eax
        ret
How about ARM?
$
llc-3.0 -O3 sample.ll -march
=
arm -o sample-arm.s
square_unsigned
:
mov     r1
,
r0
        mul     r0
,
r1
,
r1
        mov     pc
,
lr
Given IR it's trivial to compile it to a decent machine code for any
architecture. Your hand crafted assembly code might be faster if
you're lucky, but writing IR can have advantages:
Your assembly code will not use faster instructions available in
   future CPU generations.
Your code won't work on older CPU's.
Porting assembly to another CPU architecture is tedious.
You even need to spend time porting your assembler to different
   operating systems. For example global symbols need underscores on
   mac. Dealing with
#include
's can be painful.
You need to be a serious expert to write assembly better than an
   LLVM compiler.
If you really can write better assembly than LLVM, please:
Don't write any more assembler by hand - write IR and create new
LLVM optimisers instead.
It'll benefit everybody, not only you. Think about it - you won't need
to write the same optimisations all over again on your next project!
Vectors in IR
The full power the IR language is visible when dealing with
vectors. You can use any vector type you wish and not worry about the
machine architecture underneath. For example, let's consider
multiplying four 32 bit integers in parallel:
define
<
4
x
i32
>
@multiply_four
(<
4
x
i32
>
%a
,
<
4
x
i32
>
%b
)
{
%1
=
mul
<
4
x
i32
>
%a
,
%b
ret
<
4
x
i32
>
%1
}
In my opinion this code looks much nicer than its C equivalent (using
vector extensions). The resulting assembly is long when LLVM compiles
it without option
-march=avx,sse41
, but with this option turned on
it becomes:
multiply_four
:
vpmulld
%xmm1, %
xmm0
,
%xmm0
        ret
Similarly the result for ARM with
-march=neon
is decent:
multiply_four
:
mov     r12
,
sp
        vmov    d19
,
r2
,
r3
        vldmia  r12
,
{
d16
,
d17
}
vmov    d18
,
r0
,
r1
        vmul.i32        q8
,
q9
,
q8
        vmov    r0
,
r1
,
d16
        vmov    r2
,
r3
,
d17
        mov     pc
,
lr
Finally
I think it's amazing that once written pseudo-assembly code can be
retargetted to any architecture
2
. For me IR has all the advantages of
assembly without any of its problems: fast, expressive, retargettable
and maintainable.
If for some reason you're not happy with the machine code LLVM
produces - write
an LLVM optimiser (AOSA chapter 11.3.1)
.
Comments
From: Vitaly Vidmirov

> "Similarly the result for ARM with -march=neon is decent:"

Are you joking? Right? ARM code in your examples is ridiculous. It is sad, that LLVM can't eliminate useless movs even in such trivial examples.

square_unsigned:
   mul r0,r0,r0
   mov pc,lr

Your examples use soft-float-abi then floating point data transfered in integer registers. For compatibility with FPU-less processors.  ARM processors before Cortex A15 has decoupled FPU, so fp<->int transfers cause huge stalls to serialize pipelines.

multiply_four:
   vmul.i32  q0, q0, q1
   mov pc,lr
From: giampaolo eusebi

To the attention of Vitaly:
From the ARM information center Assembler reference:
For the MUL and MLA instructions, Rn must be different from Rd in architectures before ARMv6.
