---
title: "I want a better action graph serialization"
url: "https://jyn.dev/i-want-a-better-action-graph-serialization/"
fetched_at: 2026-04-29T07:02:11.448694+00:00
source: "jyn.dev"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# I want a better action graph serialization

Source: https://jyn.dev/i-want-a-better-action-graph-serialization/

This post is part 3/4 of
a series about build systems
.
The next post and last post is
I want a better build executor
.
As someone who ends up getting the ping on "my build is weird"
after
it has gone through a round of "poke it with a stick", I would really appreciate the
mechanisms
for [correct dependency edges] rolling out sooner rather than later.
mathstuf
what does "action graph" mean?
In
a previous post
, I talked about various approaches in the design space of build systems. In this post, I want to zero in on one particular area: action graphs.
First, let me define "action graph". If you've ever used CMake, you may know that there are two steps involved: A "configure" step (
cmake -B build-dir
) and a build step (
make
or
cmake --build
). What I am interested here is what
cmake -B
generates
, the Makefiles it has created. As
the creator of ninja writes
, this is a
serialization
of all build steps at a given moment in time, with the ability to regenerate the graph by rerunning the configure step.
This post explores that design space, with the goal of sketching a format that improves on the current state while also enabling incremental adoption. When I say "design space", I mean a serialization format where files are machine-generated by a configure step, and have few enough and restricted enough features that it's possible to make a fast
build executor
.
who uses an action graph?
Not all build systems serialize their action graph.
bazel
and
buck2
run persistent servers that store it in memory and allow querying it, but never serialize it to disk. For large graphs, this requires a lot of memory;
blaze
has actually started
serializing parts of its graph to reduce memory usage and startup time
.
The nix evaluator doesn’t allow querying its graph at all; nix has a very strange model where it never rebuilds because each change to your source files is a new “
input-addressed derivation
” and therefore requires a reconfigure. This is the main reason it’s only used to package software, not as an “inner” build system, because that reconfigure can be very slow.
I’ve talked to a couple Nix maintainers and they’ve considered caching parts of the
configure
step, without caching its outputs (because there are no outputs, other than derivation files!) in order to speed this up. This is much trickier because it requires serializing parts of the evaluator state.
Tools that
do
serialize their graph include CMake, Meson, and the Chrome build system (
GN
).
Generally, serializing the graph comes in handy when:
You don’t have a persistent server to store it in memory. When you don’t have a server, serializing makes your startup times much faster, because you don’t have to rerun the configure step each time.
You don’t have a remote build cache. When you have a remote cache, the rules for
loading
that cache can be rather complicated because they involve network queries . When you have a local cache, loading it doesn’t require special support because it’s just opening a file.
You want to support querying, process spawning, and progress updates without rewriting the logic yourself for every OS (i.e. you don't want to write your own build executor).
design goals
In the last post I talked about 4 things one might want from a build system:
a "real" language in the configuration step
reflection (querying the build graph)
file watching
support for discovering incorrect dependency edges
For a serialization format, we have slightly different constraints.
We care about it being simple and unambiguous to load the graph from the file, so we get fast incremental rebuild speed and graph queries. In particular, we want to touch the filesystem as little as possible while loading.
We care about supporting "weird" dependency edges, like
dynamic dependencies
and the depfiles emitted by a compiler after the first run, so that we're able to support more kinds of builds.
And finally, we care about
minimizing reconfigurations
: we want to be able to express as many things as possible in the action graph so we don't have the pay the cost of rerunning the configure step. This tends to be at odds with fast graph loading; adding features at this level of the stack is very expensive!
Throughout this post, I'll dive into detail on how these 3 overarching goals apply to the serialization format, and how well various serializations achieve that goal.
existing serializations
The first one we'll look at, because it's the default for CMake, is
make
and Makefiles. Make is truly in the Unix spirit: easy to implement, very hard to use correctly.  Make is
ambiguous
,
complicated
, and makes it very easy to
implicitly do a bunch of file system lookups
. It supports running shell commands at the top-level, which makes even loading the graph very expensive. It does do pretty well on minimizing reconfigurations, since the language is quite flexible.
Ninja is the other generator supported by CMake. Ninja is explicitly intended to work on a serialized action graph; it's the only tool I'm aware of that is. It
solves a lot of the problems of Make
: it removes many of the ambiguities; it doesn't have any form of globbing; and generally it's a much simpler and smaller language. Unfortunately, Ninja's build file format still has some limitations.
First, it has no support for checksums. It's possible to work around that by using
restat = true
and having a wrapper script that doesn't overwrite files unless they've changed, but that's a lot of extra work and is annoying to make portable between operating systems.
Ninja files also have trouble expressing correct dependency edges. Let's look at a few examples, one by one. In each of these cases, we either have to reconfigure more often than we wish, or we have no way at all of expressing the dependency edge.
dependency edge issues with ninja
negative dependencies
See
my previous post
about negative dependencies. The short version is that build files need to specify not just the files they expect to exist, but also the files they expect
not
to exist. There's no way to express this in a ninja file, short of reconfiguring every time a directory that might contain a negative dependency is modified, which itself has a lot of downsides.
renamed files
Say that you have a C project with just a
main.c
. You rename it to
project.c
and ninja gives you an error that main.c no longer exists. Annoyed of editing ninja files by hand, you decide to write a generator :
import
ninja_syntax
import
os
import
sys
from
os
.
path
import
basename
,
splitext
writer
=
ninja_syntax
.
Writer
(
sys
.
stdout
)
writer
.
rule
(
"
python
"
,
"
python $in > $out
"
)
writer
.
build
(
"
build.ninja
"
,
"
python
"
,
"
build.py
"
,
implicit
=
[
"
.
"
]
)
writer
.
rule
(
"
cc
"
,
"
cc $in -o $out
"
)
for
path
in
os
.
listdir
(
'
.
'
)
:
base
,
ext
=
splitext
(
path
)
if
ext
==
'
.c
'
:
writer
.
build
(
base
,
"
cc
"
,
path
)
Note this that this registers an implicit dependency on the current directory. This should automatically detect that you renamed your file and rebuild for you.
$ ninja
[1/1] python build.py > build.ninja
[1/2] python build.py > build.ninja
[1/3] python build.py > build.ninja
[1/4] python build.py > build.ninja
[1/5] python build.py > build.ninja
[1/6] python build.py > build.ninja
...
[1/100] python build.py > build.ninja
ninja: error: manifest 'build.ninja' still dirty after 100 tries, perhaps system time is not set
Oh. Right. Generating build.ninja also modifies the current directory, which creates an infinite loop.
It's possible to work around this by putting your C file in a source directory:
writer
.
build
(
"
build.ninja
"
,
"
python
"
,
"
build.py
"
,
implicit
=
[
"
src
"
]
)
for
path
in
os
.
listdir
(
'
src
'
)
:
base
,
ext
=
splitext
(
path
)
if
ext
==
'
.c
'
:
writer
.
build
(
'
src/
'
+
base
,
"
cc
"
,
'
src/
'
+
path
)
$
tree
.
├── build.ninja
├── build.py
├── main.c
├── ninja_syntax.py
└── src
└── main.c
$
ninja
[1/1] python build.py > build.ninja
[1/2] cc src/main.c -o src/main
$
mv
src/
{
main
,
project
}
.c
$
ninja
[1/1] python build.py > build.ninja
[1/2] cc src/project.c -o src/project
There's still a problem here, though—did you notice it?
$ ls src
main  project  project.c
Our old
main
target is still lying around. Ninja actually has enough information recorded to fix this:
ninja -t cleandead
. But it's not run automatically.
The other problem is that this approach rebuilds far too often. In this case, we wanted to support renames, so in Ninja's model we need to depend on the whole directory. But that's not what we really depended on—we only care about
.c
files. I would like to see a action graph format that has an event-based system, where it says "this file was created, make any changes to the action graph necessary", and cuts the build short if the graph wasn't changed.
optional file dependencies
For
flower
, I want to go further and support
deletions
: source files and targets that are optional, that should not fail the build if they aren't present, but should cause a rebuild if they are created, modified, or deleted. Ninja has no way of expressing this.
environment variables
Ninja has no way to express “this node becomes dirty when an environment variable changes”. The closest you can get is hacks with
set
and the checksum wrapper/restat hack, but it’s a pain to express and it gets much worse if you want to depend on multiple variables.
designing a new action graph
At this point, we have a list of constraints for our file format:
Negative dependencies
File rename dependencies
Optional file dependencies
Optional checksums to reduce false positives
Environment variable dependencies
"all the features of ninja" (depfiles,
monadic builds
through
dyndeps
, a
generator
statement, order-only dependencies)
Ideally, it would even be possible to mechanically translate existing .ninja files to this new format.
a first try
This sketches out a new format that could improve over Ninja files. It could look something like this:
A very very small clojure subset (just
def
,
let
,
EDN
, and function calls) for the text itself, no need to make loading the graph harder than necessary . If people really want an equivalent of
include
or
subninja
I suppose this could learn support for
ns
and
require
, but it would have much simpler rules than Clojure's classpath. It would not have support for looping constructs, nor most of clojure's standard library.
redo
-inspired dependency edges:
ifwritten
(for changes in file attributes),
ifchanged
(for changes in the checksum),
ifcreate
(for optional dependencies),
always
; plus our new
ifdeleted
edge.
A
dyndeps
input function that can be used anywhere a file path can (e.g. in calls to
ifwritten
) so that the kind of edge does not depend on whether the path is known in advance or not.
Runtime functions that determine whether the configure step needs to be re-run based on file watch events. Whether there is actually a file watcher or the build system just calculates a diff on its next invocation is an implementation detail; ideally, one that's easy to slot in and out.
“phony” targets would be replaced by a
group
statement. Groups are sets of targets. Groups cannot be used to avoid “input not found” errors; that niche is filled by
ifcreated
.
I’d call this language Magma, since it’s the simplest kind of set with closure.
Here's a sample action graph in Magma:
(
defn
cc
[
vars
]
{
:
command
[
"
cc
"
(
:
inputs
vars
)
"
-MD
"
"
-MF
"
(
:
depfile
vars
)
"
-o
"
(
:
out
vars
)
]
}
)
(
action
:
outputs
[
"
main
"
]
:
rule
cc
:
inputs
{
:
ifwritten
[
"
main.c
"
"
helper.c
"
]
}
:
implicit
{
:
ifwritten
[
"
helper.h
"
]
}
:
env
[
"
LIBRARY_PATH
"
"
C_INCLUDE_PATH
"
]
:
depfile
"
main.c.d
"
)
(
action
:
name
"
docker-image
"
:
outputs
[
]
:
rule
(
fn
[
_vars
]
{
:
command
[
"
docker
"
"
build
"
"
.
"
]
}
)
:
implicit
:
always
)
(
defn
files
[
paths
]
(
filter
#
(
not
(
str/ends-with?
%
"
/
"
)
)
paths
)
)
(
def
tarfile
{
:
ifwritten
[
"
example.tar
"
]
}
)
(
defn
list-tar-files
[
vars
]
[
{
:
command
[
"
tar
"
"
-tf
"
(
:
inputs
vars
)
]
:
stdout
:
string
}
{
:
transformer
(
fn
[
paths
]
(
str/join
"
\n
"
(
files
(
str/split
#
"
\n
"
paths
)
)
)
)
}
{
:
write
(
:
outputs
vars
)
}
]
)
(
action
:
outputs
[
"
example.tar.dd
"
]
:
rule
list-tar-files
:
inputs
tarfile
)
(
def
tar-outputs
(
dynout
:
inputs
{
:
ifchanged
[
"
example.tar.dd
"
]
}
:
rule
(
fn
[
vars
]
[
{
:
read
(
:
inputs
vars
)
}
{
:
transformer
#
(
str/split
%
#
"
\n
"
)
}
]
)
)
)
(
action
:
outputs
tar-outputs
:
inputs
tarfile
:
rule
(
fn
[
vars
]
{
:
command
[
"
tar
"
"
-xf
"
(
:
inputs
vars
)
]
}
)
)
(
group
"
all
"
(
concat
[
"
main
"
docker-image
]
tar-outputs
)
)
(
defn
should-rerun
[
event
]
(
and
(
ends-with?
(
:
path
event
)
"
.c
"
)
(
not=
:
modified
(
:
kind
event
)
)
)
)
(
action
:
outputs
[
"
build.magma
"
]
:
rule
{
:
command
[
"
python
"
"
configure.py
"
]
}
:
generator
true
:
env
[
"
CFLAGS
"
"
LDFLAGS
"
]
:
inputs
{
:
watch
{
"
.
"
should-rerun
}
}
)
Note some things about Magma:
Command spawning is specified as an array . No more dependency on shell quoting rules. If people want shell scripts they can put that in their configure script.
Redirecting stdout no longer requires bash syntax, it's supported natively with the
:stdout
parameter of
:rule
.
Build parameters can be referred to in rules through the
vars
argument.
dynout
is a
thunk
; it only registers an intent to add edges in the future, it does not eagerly require
example.tar.dd
to exist.
Our
watch
input edge is generalized and can apply to any rule, not just to the configure step. It executes when a file is modified (or if the tool doesn’t support file watching, on each file in the calculated diff in the next tool invocation).
Our
watch
edge provides the file event type, but not the file contents. This allows ronin to automatically map
true
results to one of the three edge kinds:
:ifwritten
,
:ifcreated
,
:ifdeleted
.
:always
and
:ifchanged
are not available through this API.
We naturally distinguish between “phony targets” and files because the former are
group
s and the latter are
action
s. No more accidentally failing to build if an
all
file is created.
We naturally distinguish between “groups of targets” and “commands that always need to be rerun”; the latter just uses
:inputs :always
.
Data can be transformed in memory using clojure functions without needing a separate process invocation. No more need to use
sed
in your build system.
"did you just reinvent
starlark
?"
Kinda. Magma itself has a lot in common with Starlark: it's deterministic, hermetic, immutable, and can be evaluated in parallel.
The main difference between the languages themselves is that Clojure has
:keywords
(equivalent to sympy symbolic variables) and Python doesn't. Some of these could be rewritten to keyword arguments, and others could be rewritten to structs, or string keys for a hashmap, or enums; but I'm not sure how much benefit there is to literally using Starlark when these files are being generated by a configure step in any case. Probably it's possible to make a 1-1 mapping between the two in any case.
runners
Buck2 has support for
RunInfo
metadata that describes how to execute a built artifact. I think this is really interesting;
cargo run --bin xyz -- args
is a much nicer interface than
make ARGS='args' xyz
, partly because of shell quoting and word splitting issues, and partly just because it's more discoverable.
I don't have a clean idea for how to fit this into a serialization layer. "Don't put it there and use a
Justfile
instead"
works
, but makes it hard to do things like allow the build graph to say that an artifact needs
LD_LIBRARY_PATH
set or something like that, you end up duplicating the info in both files. Perhaps one option could be to attach a
:run
key/value pair to
action
s.
"are you just piling a bunch of features on top of ninja?"
Well, yes and no. Yes, in that this has basically all the features of ninja and then some.
But no, because the rules here are all carefully constrained to avoid needing to do expensive file I/O to load the build graph.
The most expensive new feature is
watch
, and it's intended to avoid an even more expensive step (rerunning the configuration step).
It's also limited to changed files; it can't do arbitrary globbing on the contents of the directory the way that Make pattern rules can.
Note that this also removes some features in ninja: shell commands are gone, process spawning is much less ambiguous,
dyndep
files are no longer parsed automatically.
And because this embeds a clojure interpreter, many things that were hard-coded in ninja can instead be library functions:
rule
, response files,
msvc_deps_prefix
,
in_newline
.
next steps
In this post, we have learned some downsides of Make and Ninja's build file formats, sketched out how they could possibly be fixed, and designed a language called Magma that has those characteristics. In the next post, I'll describe the features and design of a tool that evaluates and queries this language.
