---
title: "A Lean Syntax Primer"
url: "https://overreacted.io/a-lean-syntax-primer/"
fetched_at: 2026-04-29T07:01:55.643985+00:00
source: "overreacted.io"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# A Lean Syntax Primer

Source: https://overreacted.io/a-lean-syntax-primer/

This is my opinionated syntax primer for the
Lean
programming language. It is far from complete and may contain inaccuracies (I’m still learning Lean myself) but this is how I wish I was introduced to it, and what I wish was clarified.
This post assumes you’re already eager to learn a bit of Lean. For motivation, I humbly submit to you two takes:
one from me
and
one from its creator
.
Let’s start by writing a few
definitions
. These can appear at the top level of the file:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
(
Try it in the online playground.
)
Note you have to write
:=
(assignment) rather than
=
. This is because Lean uses
=
for comparisons. This might remind you of Go or Pascal (if you’re old enough).
Although you haven’t written any types explicitly, each definition is typed. To find out their types, you can hover over
name
and
age
in the online playground or
inside VS Code
. You should see
name : String
and
42 : Nat
, respectively. (Going forward, when I say “hover”, I’ll assume either of those environments.)
Here,
String
is obviously a string, while
Nat
stands for a “natural number”. In Lean, natural numbers include
0
,
1
,
2
, and so on, going up arbitrarily large.
You could specify types explicitly by writing
: SomeType
before the
:=
:
def
name
: String :=
"Alice"
def
age
: Nat :=
42
If you don’t, Lean will try to infer the type from what you wrote on the right side.
You’ve just seen that Lean infers
"Alice"
to be a
String
and
42
to be a
Nat
. A
Nat
could be
0
,
1
,
2
, and so on. What if you try a negative number like
-140
?
def
temperature
:= -
140
If you hover on
temperature
, you’ll see that it’s an
Int
. An
Int
, which stands
for integer
, is a built-in type allowing any whole number, negative or positive.
You could ask for a specific type like
Int
explicitly in the definition:
def
roomTemperature
: Int :=
25
If you just wrote
def roomTemperature := 25
, Lean would give you a
Nat
, but adding
: Int
explicitly nudged type inference to try to produce an
Int
.
Another way to ask for a specific type is to wrap the expression itself:
def
roomTemperature
:= (
25
: Int)
In both cases, you’re saying you really want to get an
Int
. If Lean couldn’t figure out how to produce an
Int
from the expression, it would give you a type error.
Let’s calculate Alice’s birth year based on her age:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
We need to get
birthYear
somewhere on the screen. If you’re following along in the
online playground
, you might realize that your code isn’t actually running.
This is because there are two ways to use Lean.
One way to use Lean is to run your code. Another way to use Lean is to prove some facts
about
your code. You can also do both—write code and proofs about it. We’re going to start by learning to run some code, and then we’ll look at writing proofs.
If you just want to see the result of some expression, add an
#eval
command:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
#eval
birthYear
Hovering over this
#eval
in your editor will now say
1983
. Another place where it’ll show up is the
InfoView
on the right side of the online playground:
Note
1983
in the bottom right corner. If you
set up VS Code with the Lean extension
locally, you can get the same InfoView displayed like this:
Lean InfoView is incredibly useful and I suggest to keep it open at all times.
The
#eval
command is handy for doing inline calculations and to verify your code is working as intended. But maybe you actually want to run a program that outputs something. You can turn a Lean file into a real program by defining
main
:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
def
main
:= IO.println birthYear
I intentionally did not say “a
main
function” because
main
is not a function. (You can hover over it to learn the type of the
main
but we won’t focus on that today.)
Let’s run our program:
lean
--run
Scratch.lean
Now
1983
appears in the terminal. Alternatively, you could also do this:
lean
Scratch.lean
-c
Scratch.c
The C code generated by Lean compiler will include an instruction to print
1983
:
LEAN_EXPORT lean_object
*
_lean_main
(lean_object
*
x_1) {
lean_object
*
x_2
;
lean_object
*
x_3
;
x_2
=
lean_unsigned_to_nat(
1983
u
)
;
x_3
=
l_IO_println___at___main_spec__0(x_2, x_1)
;
return
x_3
;
}
Now you see that Lean can be used to write programs.
Now let’s
prove
that
age + birthYear
together add up to
2025
.
Define a little
theorem
alongside with your program:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
theorem
my_theorem
: age + birthYear =
2025
:=
by
sorry
A
theorem
is
like
a
def
, but aimed specifically at declaring proofs.
The declared type of a theorem is a statement that it’s supposed to prove. Your job is now to construct a proof of that type, and the Lean “tactic mode” (activated with
by
) provides you with an interactive and concise way to construct such proofs.
Initially, the InfoView tells you that your goal is
age + birthYear = 2025
:
However, that’s not something you can be sure in directly. What’s
age
? Try to
unfold age
to replace
age
in the goal with whatever its definition says:
Note how this made the goal in your InfoView change to
42 + birthYear = 2025
. Okay, but what’s a
birthYear
? Let’s
unfold birthYear
as well:
You’re getting closer; the goal is now
42 + (2025 - age) = 2025
. Unfolding
birthYear
brought back
age
, what’s
age
again? Let’s
unfold age
:
At this point the goal is
42 + (2025 - 42) = 2025
, which is a simple arithmetic expression. The built-in
decide
tactic can solve those with gusto:
And you’re done! You’ve now proven that
age + birthYear = 2025
without actually having
run
any code. This is being verified
during typechecking.
You can verify that editing
age
to another number will not invalidate your proof. However, if you edit
birthYear
to
2023 - age
, the proof no longer typechecks:
Of course, this was all a bit verbose. Instead of doing
unfold
for each definition manually, you can tell the
simp
simplifier to do them recursively for you:
This also proves the goal.
This example is contrived but I wanted to show you how it feels to step through the code step by step and transform it “outside in”. It almost makes you feel like
you’re
the computer, logically transforming the code towards the goal. It won’t always be so tedious, especially if you have some useful theorems prepared.
We’ll come back to proving things, but for now let’s learn some more Lean basics.
Have another look at this
main
definition:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
def
main
:= IO.println birthYear
Here,
IO.println birthYear
is a function call.
IO
is a namespace, and
println
is a function defined in that namespace. You pass
birthYear
to it.
You could avoid the need to write
IO.
before it by
opening
the
IO
namespace:
open
IO
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
def
main
:= println birthYear
This doesn’t have to be done at the top of the file:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
open
IO
def
main
:= println birthYear
It can be a bit confusing that now you have to write
IO.println
anywhere above that
open IO
but you can write
println
directly anywhere below it. As an alternative, you can scope opening
IO
to a specific definition by adding
in
:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
open
IO
in
def
main
:= println birthYear
This would make the shorter syntax available inside
main
but not outside it.
We’re not using
IO
much so I’ll keep referring to
println
as
IO.println
below.
Now notice how you’re passing
birthYear
to the
println
function:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
def
main
:= IO.println birthYear
Unlike languages like JavaScript, Lean doesn’t use parentheses or commas for function calls. Instead of
f(a, b, c)
, you would write
f a b c
in Lean.
I need to emphasize this. No commas and no parens are used for function calls!
However, you would sometimes use parentheses
around
individual arguments. Suppose you replace
birthYear
with
2025 - age
directly in the function call:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
main
:= IO.println
2025
- age
This will lead to an error:
Lean thinks you’re trying to do
(IO.println 2025) - age
, so it looks for a way to subtract
age
(which is a
Nat
) from whatever
IO.println 2025
returns (which happens to be something called
IO Unit
). Lean can’t find a subtraction operation (
HSub
) between an
IO Unit
and a
Nat
, so it gives up in frustration.
To fix this, add parentheses around
2025 - age
:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
main
:= IO.println (
2025
- age)
Now instead of
IO.println
“eating” the
2025
argument, it knows that the first argument is the entire
(2025 - age)
expression. You might find it helpful to use
(
and
)
liberally and try removing them to get a feel for when they’re necessary.
Note
(
and
)
here have nothing to do with the
IO.println
function call. Their only purpose is to “group”
2025 - age
together, like you group things in math.
In other words, instead of writing
something(f(x, y), a, g(z))
as you might in JavaSript, you would write
something (f x y) a (g z)
in Lean.
Read this closely several times and make sure it burns deep in your subconscious.
You can’t nest Lean definitions. However, if some of your definitions get complex, you can simplify them by declaring some
let
bindings inside of the
def
.
For example, you could pull
(2025 - age)
from the last example into a
let
:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
main
:=
let
birthYear :=
2025
- age
IO.println birthYear
Again, note the use of
:=
for assignment. It’s
:=
, not
=
!
You might think that being multiline makes
main
a function, but it doesn’t. Adding a
let
binding is just a way to make definitions easier to read. You could use
let
inside of any definition, including the
name
and
age
definitions:
def
name
:=
let
namesInPassport := [
"Alice"
,
"Babbage"
,
"McDuck"
]
namesInPassport[
0
]
def
age
:=
let
twenty :=
20
let
one :=
1
twenty + twenty + one + one
def
main
:=
let
birthYear :=
2025
- age
IO.println birthYear
There is no need for a
return
statement here. The last line of a definition becomes its value. This is why the definitions above are equivalent to:
def
name
:= [
"Alice"
,
"Babbage"
,
"McDuck"
][
0
]
def
age
:=
20
+
20
+
1
+
1
def
main
:= IO.println (
2025
- age)
In the end, the right side of any definition unfolds into a single expression, but
let
lets you break down that expression into more readable (and reusable) pieces.
Currently
birthYear
hardcodes
2025
into the calculation:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
def
main
:= IO.println birthYear
You can turn
birthYear
into a
function
definition by declaring a
currentYear
argument immediately after writing
def birthYear
followed by a space:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
currentYear
:= currentYear - age
This makes
birthYear
a function. You can call it by writing
birthYear 2025
:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
currentYear
:= currentYear - age
def
main
:= IO.println (birthYear
2025
)
Again, the parens around
birthYear 2025
ensure that
IO.println
doesn’t try to “eat” the
birthYear
function itself. We want it to “eat”
birthYear 2025
.
If you hover over
birthYear
now, you’ll see that its type is no longer a
Nat
:
This is how Lean pretty-prints function types. You see the function name
birthYear
, followed by its arguments (we only have one),
:
and the return type.
You could write it that way explicitly, too, to clarify your intended types:
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Nat) : Nat := currentYear - age
Note, again, that
(
)
parentheses in Lean have nothing to do with function calls. You only use the parentheses to treat
(currentYear : Nat)
as a single thing.
You’ve seen two ways to define the same function, with implicit and explicit types:
/-- Types are implicit here, Lean infers them -/
def
birthYear
currentYear
:= currentYear - age
/-- Types are explicit here -/
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Nat) : Nat := currentYear - age
There are even more valid ways to write the same thing with different verbosity. Here is a (non-exhaustive) list of ways to define the same
birthYear
function:
/-- Concise definition -/
def
birthYear
currentYear
:= currentYear - age
def
birthYear
(currentYear: Nat) := currentYear - age
def
birthYear
(currentYear: Nat) : Nat := currentYear - age
/-- Definition set to an anonymous function -/
def
birthYear
:=
fun
currentYear => currentYear - age
def
birthYear
:=
fun
(currentYear: Nat) => currentYear - age
/-- Definition (with explicit type) set to an anonymous function -/
def
birthYear
: Nat → Nat :=
fun
currentYear => currentYear - age
This might remind you of
function f() {}
vs
const f = () => ...
in JS. I find the concise syntax most pleasant to read and recommend using it unless you specifically need an anonymous function (e.g. to pass it to another function).
Here,
Nat → Nat
is the actual type of
birthYear
, no matter which syntax is used. It takes a
Nat
and it returns a
Nat
, so it’s
Nat → Nat
. The fancy
→
arrow is typed by writing
\to
followed by a space in the
playground
or with
Lean VSCode
.
Specifying argument types but inferring the return is often a nice middle ground:
def
birthYear
(currentYear: Nat) := currentYear - age
Just like with
function
declarations vs arrow functions in JavaScript, the level of verbosity and typing that you want to do in each case is mostly up to you.
(Sidenote: You might also see syntax like
fun x ↦ x * 2
rather than
fun x => x * 2
. Here,
↦
is typed as
\maps
, and mathematicians prefer it aesthetically to
=>
. Lean doesn’t distinguish them so you’ll see
=>
in codebases like Lean itself while
↦
shows up in “mathy” codebases like Mathlib. They both work with
fun
.)
Now that you know a dozen ways to write functions, let’s get back to this one:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
currentYear
:= currentYear - age
def
main
:= IO.println (birthYear
2025
)
Suppose you want to make
age
an argument to the
birthYear
function. To add an argument, just write it next in the
def birthYear
definition argument list:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
currentYear
age
:= currentYear - age
def
main
:= IO.println (birthYear
2025
42
)
Actually, this doesn’t work, and the error is sucky.
The problem is the issue I described earlier—at this point, Lean has no idea what the types of
currentYear
and
age
might be. Previously, it relied on
age
being an earlier declaration (and inferred it to be a
Nat
) but now Lean is truly stumped.
The strange error message (“typeclass instance is stuck”) alludes to the fact that it’s trying to find an implementation of subtraction between two types (searching for that implementation is done via “typeclass search”) but it doesn’t even know what those types are (that’s why you see weird
?m.24
and
?m.12
placeholders).
The fix to this is to bite the bullet and to actually specify the types:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Nat) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
def
main
:= IO.println (birthYear
2025
42
)
Now there is no ambiguity. Note that the parentheses here don’t mean anything special—it’s only a way to separate parameters from each other. Just like when calling functions, we’re not using commas so we need parens for grouping.
When you have multiple parameters of the same type in a row, like
currentYear
and
age
above, you may put them together together under one type declaration:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
def
main
:= IO.println (birthYear
2025
42
)
This doesn’t change semantics but is shorter to write. This is particularly useful in mathematics where you might have 3 or 4 parameters that are all
Nat
or such.
Now that you’re specifying all parameter types explicitly, it makes sense to think about them harder and to give them slightly different types. While
age
should remain a
Nat
,
currentYear
makes more sense as an
Int
so that the calculation still works for people born in the BC era or who are over two thousand years old.
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
def
main
:= IO.println (birthYear
2025
42
)
The non-pretty-formatted type of
birthYear
is
Int → Nat → Int
because it takes an
Int
and also a
Nat
, and returns an
Int
. As in some other functional languages, you can partially apply it—for example,
birthYear 2025
will give you a
Nat → Int
function that you can later call with the remaining
age
argument.
By now, you might have guessed that there are other increasingly deranged equivalent ways to define the same function that takes an
Int
and a
Nat
:
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) := currentYear - age
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) :=
fun
(age : Nat) => currentYear - age
def
birthYear
:=
fun
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) => currentYear - age
def
birthYear
:=
fun
(currentYear : Int) =>
fun
(age : Nat) => currentYear - age
def
birthYear
: Int → Nat → Int :=
fun
currentYear age => currentYear - age
def
birthYear
: Int → Nat → Int :=
fun
currentYear =>
fun
age => currentYear - age
Read them closely keeping in mind that they are all exactly equivalent in Lean.
It’s confusing to mix syntax within a single definition so we’ll stick with this:
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
It’s time to revisit proofs.
A few sections earlier, you’ve proven
birthYear + age = 2025
for this code:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
age
:=
42
def
birthYear
:=
2025
- age
theorem
my_theorem
: age + birthYear =
2025
:=
by
simp [age, birthYear]
However, now
birthYear
is a function which takes two arguments:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
You could copypaste this theorem for concrete values of
age
and
currentYear
:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
theorem
my_theorem
:
42
+ birthYear
2025
42
=
2025
:=
by
simp [birthYear]
theorem
my_theorem'
:
25
+ birthYear
2025
25
=
2025
:=
by
simp [birthYear]
theorem
my_theorem''
:
77
+ birthYear
1980
77
=
1980
:=
by
simp [birthYear]
These proofs typecheck, but there’s a feeling that it’s not any better than writing tests. What we’re hoping to capture is a
universal pattern
, not a bunch of cases.
The fact is, no matter what
cy
(I’ll shorten “current year” to that) and
a
(short for “age”) are,
a + birthYear cy a
should be equal to
cy
. Let’s capture that:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
theorem
my_theorem
: a + birthYear cy a = cy :=
by
sorry
Although you haven’t declared
a
and
cy
, this is actually valid syntax! The VS Code Lean extension will implicitly insert
{a cy}
arguments after
my_theorem
:
These “implicit” arguments surrounded by
{
}
curly braces can sometimes be very useful to avoid boilerplate, but in this case they’re more confusing than helpful. Let’s declare
cy
and
a
explicitly as normal arguments to
my_theorem
:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
theorem
my_theorem
(cy : Int) (a : Nat) : a + birthYear cy a = cy :=
by
sorry
Note how declaring
my_theorem
with
cy
and
a
is similar to declaring function arguments—except that you can’t actually “run” this theorem. You’re just stating that, for any
cy
and
a
, you can produce a proof of
a + birthYear cy a = cy
.
Let’s see if you actually can!
You start out with the goal of
↑a + birthYear cy a = cy
:
The
⊢
symbol before it tells you that this is the goal, i.e. what you want to prove. Things above it, like
cy : Int
and
a : Nat
, are the things you
already have.
You might be wondering: what
are
those
cy : Int
and
a : Nat
. What
are
their values? But the question doesn’t make sense. You’re writing a proof, so in a sense, you are working with
all possible values at the same time.
You only have their types.
Have another look at the goal:
↑a + birthYear cy a = cy
.
What’s that up arrow?
Hover over it in the InfoView:
The signature is a bit confusing (what’s that
@
? what’s that
instNatCastInt
?) but you can see that it takes your
a
(which is a
Nat
) and returns an
Int
. So this is how Lean displays the fact that your
a
is being converted to an
Int
so that it can be added with the result of
birthYear cy a
call (which is already an
Int
).
Okay, cool, the goal is to prove
↑a + birthYear cy a = cy
. How do we do that?
Well, first, let’s
unfold birthYear
to replace it with the implementation:
Now the goal becomes
↑a + (cy - ↑a) = cy
.
You can’t use the
decide
tactic from earlier because it only deals with known concrete numbers—it’s like a calculator. However, Lean also includes an
omega
tactic that can check equations that include unknown numbers like
a
and
cy
.
With
omega
, you can complete this proof!
Let’s have another look at the full code:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
theorem
my_theorem
(cy: Int) (a : Nat) : a + birthYear cy a = cy :=
by
unfold birthYear
omega
You have a function called
birthYear
and a theorem called
my_theorem
about its behavior. By convention, you might want to call it
birthYear_spec
, or something more specific like
age_add_birthYear_eq_current_year
.
In a way it’s like a test, but it’s a test for
all possible inputs of that function
that runs during typechecking. I think this is incredibly cool. You can verify that incorrectly changing the formula of
birthYear
will cause the proof to no longer typecheck:
You’ve previously declared
cy
and
a
as arguments for
my_theorem
:
theorem
my_theorem
(cy: Int) (a : Nat) : a + birthYear cy a = cy :=
by
unfold birthYear
omega
In this case, it’s fine to omit their types because they can be exactly inferred by Lean from the
birthYear
call itself, which you already explicitly annotated:
theorem
my_theorem
cy
a
: a + birthYear cy a = cy :=
by
unfold birthYear
omega
This theorem says “for all
cy
and
a
,
a + birthYear cy a
is equal to
cy
”. Mathematicians have their own way of writing statements like this, using the
universal quantifier
∀ (which stands for “for all”):
∀ cy a, a + birthYear(cy, a) = cy
.
You can restate the above in a mathematician’s style with the
∀
quantifier:
theorem
my_theorem
: ∀ cy a, a + birthYear cy a = cy :=
by
sorry
To type
∀
, write
\all
and press space.
Now instead of
cy a :
, we have
: ∀ cy a
. The universal quantifier lets the arguments get introduced “later”—pretty much like currying in programming. However, the difference is mostly stylistic. The theorem signature is the same.
When you use
∀
, you’re starting out with a universal statement (“for all
cy
and
a
”) so
cy
and
a
aren’t in your tactic state yet. Use
intro cy a
to bring them in:
Again, you don’t have their
concrete
values because a proof is supposed to work for all possible values. You don’t know anything about them except their types.
From that point, your goal is
↑a + birthYear cy a = cy
, which you can solve:
theorem
my_theorem
: ∀ cy a, a + birthYear cy a = cy :=
by
intro cy a
unfold birthYear
omega
Notice how
∀ cy a
has essentially moved the declarations of
cy
and
a
“inside” the proof itself. Under the hood, the
intro
tactic generates a nested function with
cy
and
a
arguments, so in the end this
theorem
has the same shape as before adding
∀
. It may feel disorienting that Lean lets you write the same thing in many styles, but this lets the Lean core stay small and evolve faster, while tactics and conventions may evolve independently and vary between projects.
Using
∀
may not seem particularly appealing in this example, but it is great for nested propositions where anonymous functions would add too much clutter. It can also be convenient to extract a theorem’s claim into its own definition:
def
TheLawOfAging
:
Prop
:= ∀ cy a, a + birthYear cy a = cy
theorem
my_theorem
: TheLawOfAging :=
by
unfold TheLawOfAging
intro cy a
unfold birthYear
omega
To learn what a
Prop
is, check out
my previous article
.
Now let us come back to this example, and specifically to this line:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
def
main
:=
let
year := birthYear
2025
42
IO.println year
Hover over
IO.println
, and you might freak out:
What the hell is this signature?! Learning to read these signatures will immensely improve your ability to understand Lean APIs and debug errors so I’m going to break it down even though we haven’t discussed most of the relevant topics.
The key insight is that the parts in
{
}
and
[
]
are not something you pass to the function directly. That’s why you’re able to just write
IO.println year
. However, these
are
actual arguments—they’re just filled in by Lean itself.
Command+Click into
println
to see that it declares
{α}
and
[ToString α]
:
def
println
{α} [ToString α] (s : α) : IO Unit :=
print ((toString s).push
'
\n
'
)
So if you Lean fills them in for you, where
are
they coming from?
The parts in
{
}
are called
ordinary implicit parameters
, and they are filled in by type inference based on the parameters that have already been passed in. If Lean can’t unambiguously fill them in, it will complain and would not typecheck. Here, the
α
argument is implicit, but it’s determined by what
you
passed as an explicit
(s : α)
argument. You’re printing an
Int
, you passed
(s: Int)
, so
α
is
Int
. This is similar to generics, but in Lean generics are just arguments (often implicit).
The parts in
[
]
, like
[ToString α]
, are called
instance implicit parameters
and are filled in automatically depending on the code you’ve imported so far. Lean has a mechanism that lets libraries declare implementations of certain intefaces—for example, “how to subtract
Int
and
Int
” or “how to convert
Nat
to
Int
” or “how to turn an
Int
to a
String
”. The
println
function wants a
ToString
implementation that knows how to turn whatever
you
passed (an
Int
) to a string. Lean has a
ToString Int
implementation in core, so that’s what
println
gets.
Finally, the very first
.{}
thing is a “universe” in which this function’s type lives. This is rarely something you need to deal with, and is also filled in automatically.
If you’re curious what Lean is filling in (or need to debug some gnarly case that wouldn’t typecheck), you can prefix your function call with
@
to force all arguments to be passed explicitly. Start by passing
_
placeholders:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
def
main
:=
let
year := birthYear
2025
42
@IO.println _ _ year
Now you can hover over each
_
placeholder to see what Lean has inferred for it.
For example, the
{α}
implicit parameter was inferred to be
Int
:
And the
[ToString]
instance implicit parameter received
instToStringInt
:
If you want to further debug what’s going on, you can fill them in in the code:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
def
main
:=
let
year := birthYear
2025
42
@IO.println Int instToStringInt year
That’s what you would have to type if Lean couldn’t fill them in automatically.
Now it’s easy to Command+Click them and see if they match what you expected. For example, Command+Clicking
instToStringInt
from here will teleport you to the place in the Lean source that actually implements
ToString Int
:
instance
: ToString Int
where
toString
| Int.ofNat m   => toString m
| Int.negSucc m =>
"-"
++ toString (succ m)
Seems legit! When you’re done spelunking, you can remove the
@
and the
_
s:
def
name
:=
"Alice"
def
birthYear
(currentYear : Int) (age : Nat) :=
currentYear - age
def
main
:=
let
year := birthYear
2025
42
IO.println year
Implicit and instance arguments save a tremenduous amount of boilerplate when operating on complex structures like mathematical objects and proofs. But even here, they let Lean provide a simple, extensible, and strongly-typed
println
API.
There’s a
lot
more I would’ve liked to cover but I’m running out of steam—and this article is already long. The good news is, there’s a lot you can learn by peeking under the hood on your own because Lean is extremely Command+Click-able.
You can Command+Click into data types like
Nat
and
String
, and even pieces of syntax like
∀
. Much of Lean is implemented in Lean itself, and most of the time what I found ended up both simpler and more interesting than what I expected.
/--
The natural numbers, starting at zero.
This type is special-cased by both the kernel and the compiler, and overridden with an efficient
implementation. Both use a fast arbitrary-precision arithmetic library (usually
[GMP](https://gmplib.org/)); at runtime, `Nat` values that are sufficiently small are unboxed.
-/
inductive
Nat
where
/-- Zero, the smallest natural number. -/
| zero : Nat
/-- The successor of a natural number `n`. -/
| succ (n : Nat) : Nat
Who would’ve thought that numbers are just a recursively generated enum?
Turns out, a language built with recursively defined types like this can express and prove facts like that the
area of a circle is π * r ^ 2
, or that
it takes 23 people to exceed a 50% chance of same birthday
, or that
you can’t cube a cube
. But you can also write normal programs with it that compile to C.
Async/await
is in the works.
Maybe you could create something in the middle—programs interleaved with proofs? You can see this pattern in the Lean core itself: here’s a
List.append
(
++
) function
, and here are proofs that
(as ++ bs).length = as.length + bs.length
and
(as ++ bs) ++ cs = as ++ (bs ++ cs)
written alongside it. In other words, using the Lean data structures in code means also lets you reuse known facts about those structures to prove claims about your own code.
Lean is built on old ideas and a lot of prior art, but there are both novel and pragmatic twists. Sometimes I can’t tell if I’m writing Go or Haskell, Rocq or C#, OCaml or Python. In its giddily unrestrained ambition it reminds me of
Nemerle
, but it also feels solid and grounded. It’s being used in both industry and academia, including by
DeepMind
and
Amazon
. It’s been a while since I felt excited about a programming language (mind you—a
pure
functional programming language).
Anyway, here’s a little program that counts up and down alongside some proofs.
def
append
(xs ys : List a) : List a := Id.run
do
let
mut
out := ys
for
x
in
xs.reverse
do
out := x :: out
return
out
theorem
append_abcd
: append [
"a"
,
"b"
] [
"c"
,
"d"
] = [
"a"
,
"b"
,
"c"
,
"d"
] :=
by
simp [append]
theorem
append_length
(xs ys : List a) : (append xs ys).length = xs.length + ys.length :=
by
simp [append]
def
count_up_and_down
n
:=
let
up := List.range (n)
let
down := (List.range (n +
1
)).reverse
append up down
theorem
count_up_and_down_length
n
: (count_up_and_down n).length = n *
2
+
1
:=
by
simp only [count_up_and_down, append_length, List.length_range, List.length_reverse]
omega
def
main
:=
do
IO.println
"Enter a number: "
let
stdin ← IO.getStdin
let
input ← stdin.getLine
let
n := input.trim.toNat!
let
sequence := count_up_and_down n
IO.println sequence
I’ve never written code alongside proofs like this before. Have you?
