---
title: "Optimization lessons from a Minecraft structure locator"
url: "https://purplesyringa.moe/blog/./optimization-lessons-from-a-minecraft-structure-locator/"
fetched_at: 2026-05-05T07:02:08.788919+00:00
source: "Alisa Sireneva (PurpleSyringa)"
tags: [blog, raw]
---

# Optimization lessons from a Minecraft structure locator

Source: https://purplesyringa.moe/blog/./optimization-lessons-from-a-minecraft-structure-locator/

Optimization lessons from a Minecraft structure locator
March 18, 2026
Hacker News
This post has been sitting in my drafts for a year because I never finished benchmarking stuff to the point I consider thorough enough for release. I’m trying to deal with my backlog, and I think this post has tricks that some of you might enjoy anyway. Treat it as a director’s cut sort of thing.
Minecraft generates a bedrock floor at the bottom of the world from a random noise. Since it’s random, it can contain naturally generated unescapable regions – prisons. While small prisons are common, larger ones are hard to find – a Minecraft world is about
60
million by
60
million blocks, so locating these boxes is computationally difficult. So when I saw
Bamboo Bot’s video
on this concept covering a simple tool written in Java, I knew I had to give a try myself.
VIDEO
After keeping my PC running for a couple days, here’s the largest prison I found:
I find this problem a good exercise for performance optimization because it has a limited scope, but also covers lots of topics. And it’s quite a head-scratcher due to its large scale! In this post, I’ll cover various surprising approaches and tricks I used, and hopefully you’ll be able to apply them to your projects.
Setting
The bedrock noise is generated by a boolean function
Bedrock
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
. It computes a random float from
0
to
1
based on the coordinates and compares it with a probability to determine whether it should place bedrock or keep air. At
y
=
−
64
, the probability of bedrock is
1
, and it decreases as we go up, reaching
0
at
y
=
−
59
.
The simplest bedrock prison we’re searching for looks like this. The player cannot perform a two block high jump under normal conditions, so after they get into this box, they’ll never be able to escape it (without damage ticks, anyway).
Large boxes of this exact kind are incredibly rare, so even with optimizations we’ll have to look for more complex structures.
Reducing complexity
While we
could
perform an exact analysis in the 3D space, that would be incredibly difficult to compute performantly. Instead, we can reduce this to a 2D problem that can be handled much more efficiently.
Let’s separate
1
×
1
columns of blocks into three categories:
Interior, which is a column where a player can stand on the
y
=
−
64
block, i.e. a column where both
y
=
−
63
and
y
=
−
62
blocks contain air.
Wall, which is any block configuration a player standing on
y
=
−
64
cannot jump over. This includes columns where bedrock is present at
y
=
−
62
, or columns where bedrock is present at both
y
=
−
63
and
y
=
−
61
.
Hazard, which allows a player to jump from a
y
=
−
64
block to a higher block, i.e. a column with a block at
y
=
−
63
and an empty two-block space above.
Any connected component of interior blocks that doesn’t border hazards is a prizon. This doesn’t cover some trickier valid prisons, but here’s my thought process.
Since worlds are gigantic and there are many seeds, we’ll never run out of search space. So it doesn’t matter if we skip difficult candidates – there will always be simpler ones elsewhere. The only thing that matters is how many prisons we can locate in a second, and solving the problem
exactly
wouldn’t compensate the decreased performance nearly enough.
That is, compared to an exact solution, “incomplete” and “incorrect” checks can produce better results for the same amount of resources spent.
This tradeoff also applies to problems outside brute-force search:
You don’t need to use a perfect or even a quality hash if your hash table can handle collisions fast enough via alternate means.
You don’t need to perform a comparison before applying atomic CAS if unconditional comparison is more expensive than an occasional failed swap.
You might not need to gate checks with faster checks with false positives if the latter check has a 50/50 trigger rate, because performance will suffer from branch misprediction more than from a heavier check.
Basic algorithm
Let’s start writing some code. We have a 2D grid and want to find a maximum region of “interior” cells surrounded by “wall” cells, bordering no “hazard” cells. This is typically implemented by invoking DFS from each cell:
let
mut
visited
= HashSet::
new
();
let
mut
region_size
=
0
;
let
mut
dfs
= |node: (
i32
,
i32
)|
->
Result
<(), ()> {
    visited.
insert
(node);
match
get_column_type
(node) {
        ColumnType::Interior => {
            
        }
        ColumnType::Wall => {
return
Ok
(());
        }
        ColumnType::Hazard => {
return
Err
(());
        }
    }

    region_size +=
1
;
for
(dx, dz)
in
[(-
1
,
0
), (
1
,
0
), (
0
, -
1
), (
0
,
1
)] {
let
node1
= (node.
0
+ dx, node.
1
+ dz);
if
!visited.
contains
(&node1) {
dfs
(node1)?;
        }
    }
Ok
(())
};
for
z
in
-WORLD_BORDER..=WORLD_BORDER {
for
x
in
-WORLD_BORDER..=WORLD_BORDER {
if
!visited.
contains
(&(x, z)) {
            region_size =
0
;
if
dfs
((x, z)).
is_ok
() {
                
            }
        }
    }
}
Expand
As the graph is enormous,
visited
will run out of space really quickly, so this doesn’t quite work. But we can fix this – algorithms are not set in stone. By persisting only the last row worth of data, we retain enough context for DFS (the retained cells act as a boundary between dropped cells and remaining cells, so dropped cells are never accessed) while reducing the maximum
visited
size to
≈
60000000
elements.
for
z
in
-WORLD_BORDER..=WORLD_BORDER {
for
x
in
-WORLD_BORDER..=WORLD_BORDER {
if
!visited.
contains
(&(x, z)) {
            region_size =
0
;
if
dfs
((x, z)).
is_ok
() {
                
            }
        }
        visited.
remove
(&(x, z -
1
)); 
    }
}
Note that I
don’t
populate an entire row and then drop the previous row once it’s fully complete. Instead, I remove the cell above as soon as I process the current cell. So at any point in time, the present cells are actually split between two neighbor rows. This is known as a
broken profile
, as opposed to just a normal straight profile, and it’s occasionally
used to optimize dynamic programming
.
Now we can run the code and get the first estimates for how much time this will take:
...
[8.294270481s / 0.0000011695244307304885%] found 11 at (12102852, -29999984)
...
So it takes about
22
years to scan the whole world. How we can improve it?
High-level opts
There’s a lot of low-hanging fruit here. For example, we’re using the default hashset, even though a bitset indexed by
x
could work. I wouldn’t spend time on that yet, though. While optimizing data structures is useful, it’s always better to reduce the need for them first. Let’s apply high-level optimizations and then tune low-level details instead of shoehorning them in, just to tear them out later.
A quick check shows that there’s a
lot
of prisons, most of them small, so there’s no point in saving or even finding all of them. Let’s reframe the problem as only finding “large enough” components.
A simple way to benefit from this is by invoking DFS in a checkerboard pattern: by starting search only from every other square, we can find all prisons of size
≥
2
while reducing the number of invocations. This approach can be improved further by switching to rhombi (rectangles would work too, albeit
2
times less efficiently):
The radius can be chosen arbitrarily. This combination can only miss components that fit within the
25
-block white region, so we’re guaranteed to locate components of size
≥
26
. This is about as high as these prisons get, according to some quick checks, so I can’t increase it to improve performance further. This reduces the number of root
dfs
invocations by
67
%
:
for
coords
in
diagonals
() {
if
!visited.
contains
(&coords) {
        region_size =
0
;
if
dfs
(coords).
is_ok
() {
            
        }
    }
}
A computer cannot perform
60000000
2
operations fast even if they’re insanely optimized, but skipping some of them altogether makes this way more realistic.
No code is better than fast code. This is an incredibly broad advice, so I’ll give some examples you might get inspiration from:
When your program has lots of clones and copies, you don’t optimize
memcpy
, you use pointers (although there are obviously exceptions, e.g. small objects and cache locality). Optimizing primitives is incredibly useful, but only after you reduce the amount of times they’re used.
Alpha-beta pruning
and similar cut-offs are applicable in game theory. More generally, early return is often applied in recursive algorithms when it can be proven that, at the current point, no further recursive calls can result in a better answer than the currently known optimum.
When iterating over set bits of a number, use bit tricks (e.g.
x &= x - 1;
) instead of checking if each individual bit is set.
Replace large JSONs with binary serialization formats – that’ll save you integer and string parsing costs. Better yet, use zero-copy approaches like
rkyv
or
cap’n proto
– that’ll save you pre-parsing costs as well.
Instead of checking a precondition on each method call (e.g. to validate UTF-8), make it a type invariant.
Another way to skip small prisons is to probe evenly distributed coordinates:
But this can also miss narrow large components. It
will
find all prisons containing a
3
×
3
square, but that’s a different problem from the one we started with, and I don’t want to pivot that far out.
I like separating pure optimizations from the ones that change the problem. This saves you a headache of worrying about what ifs: what if the PRNG seed was unlucky? What if we haven’t found an optimal solution just because of arbitrary choices in the implementation? If you avoid heuristics, you avoid all this trouble.
visited
Unfortunately, we’re once again in trouble due to memory usage: the
visited.remove(&(x, z - 1));
trick doesn’t work with diagonals.
Another way to fix this issue is to clear
visited
before every DFS invocation. Typically, this would increase the DFS time complexity from
𝒪
(
n
)
to
𝒪
(
k
n
)
, where
k
is the average component size, since we’d be visiting each component multiple times. But we only invoke DFS from every
diagonal
cell, so overhead is lower, and reducing the set size from
≈
60000000
to the average component size improves cache locality.
for
coords
in
diagonals
() {
    visited.
clear
();
    region_size =
0
;
if
dfs
(coords).
is_ok
() {
        
    }
}
Surprisingly, this improves performance
30
×
, reducing the total time to
250
days. I think this is due to the reduction in the
HashSet
size – and now suddenly a bitset doesn’t seem like a good solution, as it won’t fit in cache as well as
visited
does!
[445.198978ms / 0.000001923848745618791%] found 11 at (-29990069, -29998131)
[2.17199706s / 0.000009889538106497513%] found 12 at (-29991087, -29982201)
[2.798458445s / 0.000012758756604408164%] found 11 at (-29997794, 29971862)
[2.798479765s / 0.000012758756731392425%] found 11 at (-29997793, 29971863)
[2.79848252s / 0.000012758756858376685%] found 11 at (-29997792, 29971864)
...
It’s weird, right? Some optimizations work well individually and lead to pessimizations when combined. Even if you’ve found all the tricks, you still need to figure out which ones to combine. I’ve written about this in more detail
earlier
.
Vectorization
Recursive calls are slow, and we currently invoke
dfs
for all rhombi cells, even though only a small percentage will be interior cells. By lifting such a check, we can avoid costly function invocations:
for
coords
in
diagonals
() {
    visited.
clear
();
    region_size =
0
;
if
is_interior
(coords) &&
dfs
(coords).
is_ok
() {
        
    }
}
Recall that
get_column_type
might need to check three blocks to see if the column is a hazard or a wall, whereas checking if a column is an interior only needs to compare
two
blocks. Checking for bedrock is slow, so this is a great optimization. But now that
is_interior
is invoked for consecutive cells, we can also easily vectorize the check:
for
coords
in
diagonals
() {
for
coords_index
in
BitIter::
from
(
is_interior
(coords)) {
let
coords
= coords[coords_index];
        visited.
clear
();
        region_size =
0
;
if
dfs
(coords).
is_ok
() {
            
        }
    }
}
BitIter
is used to speed up iteration over set bits, as we only expect a small portion of bits to be
1
s. It uses the classical
x &= x - 1
trick under the hood.
A sequential
is_interior
function could benefit from short circuiting: if one of the blocks is bedrock, we don’t need to check the other one. Vectorization makes us abandon short circuiting, but increased throughput counteracts the performance loss.
[14.82663952s / 0.00019748246707681585%] found 15 at (-29900419, -29980309)
[14.826951506s / 0.0001974862524776069%] found 15 at (-29900418, -29980310)
[29.012100521s / 0.0003862456819715604%] found 16 at (-29997419, -29835789)
[38.530737716s / 0.000512744426557512%] found 17 at (-29899478, -29908354)
[38.53121425s / 0.0005127505261194575%] found 17 at (-29899477, -29908355)
...
This is great news: the vectorized implementation now takes
86
days to scan the world, a
3
×
improvement. And that’s with the slow built-in
HashSet
!
Floats
Let’s discuss the vectorized implementation in more detail. To do that, we need to take a look at the formulas used for bedrock generation first.
Video games are notorious for using floats all over the place. Minecraft’s bedrock noise is no exception. Minecraft generates bedrock at
(
x
,
y
,
z
)
with probability
p
increasing with
y
, interpolated linearly from
p
=
1
at
y
=
−
64
(the bottom layer) to
p
=
0
at
y
=
−
59
(one above the top layer):
I’ll write
lerp(x, a, b)
to map
x
=
0
to
a
,
x
=
1
to
b
, and linearly interpolate values for other
x
s.
lerp_inv
is its inverse.
fn
is_bedrock
(x:
i32
, y:
i32
, z:
i32
)
->
bool
{
let
mut
prng
= Prng::
new
(
hash_coordinates
(x, y, z));
let
probability
=
lerp
(
lerp_inv
(y
as
f32
, -
64.0
, -
59.0
),
1.0
,
0.0
);
f64
::
from
(prng.
next_f32
()) < probability
}
While floats are often good enough, they are a nuisance here due to imprecision. Luckily, when checking the type of a column
(x, z)
,
y
is a constant, so
probability
can be precomputed, and we only need to deal with
prng.next_f32()
and the cast to
f64
.
next_f32
is implemented by generating
24
random bits and dividing them by
2
24
. Such a division is exact, and casting
f32
to
f64
is always exact as well, so the last line of
is_bedrock
is equivalent to:
prng.
next_bits
(
24
)
as
f64
< probability *
2f64
.
powi
(
24
)
…which can in turn be rewritten as:
prng.
next_bits
(
24
) < (probability *
2f64
.
powi
(
24
)).
ceil
()
as
u64
…where the right-hand side is a constant, so we can avoid all runtime float operations.
Note the use of
.ceil()
and excessive focus on which floating-point operations are exact. This ensures that the simulation doesn’t use slightly incorrect data, which is certain to cause problems over the span of
60000000
2
blocks.
A shameless plug: while we could optimize out the
as f64
cast here, that’s not always possible, so you might be interested in my snippets for
faster int
↔
float conversion
.
AVX-512
hash_coordinates
and
prng.next_bits
are not very interesting – it’s just an ad-hoc hash and Xoroshiro:
They’re both nasty because of
64
-bit integer multiplication, which is notoriously hard to vectorize, because most vector ISAs simply don’t support it. I’ve recently got my hands on a Zen 4 node, though, and the capabilities of AVX-512 blew my mind. AVX512DQ introduces
64
-bit multiplication, and while the performance improvement is far from the theoretical
8
×
, it still helps out a ton.
AVX-512’s orthogonality significantly simplifies both algorithm design and code: this whole project has no
unsafe
and relies exclusively on
portable SIMD
, and the codegen is nearly optimal, unlike in many other situations when I’ve tried this.
Obviously, AVX-512 is highly non-portable, so that’s still not an option in many cases, but it’s more than fine for this project: it’s not like such brute-force even has a chance to work well on old hardware.
That’s vectorization done. What else comes to your mind?
Coarse filtering
Many algorithms include fast paths for special cases – like
memcpy
for small
n
. This is typically done if you can quickly check whether the fast path is applicable before applying it. But if the performance benefit is high enough, you can actually use this approach even if the correctness of the fast path result is only known post factum.
Here’s what I mean. We currently spend time checking columns for hazards, even if the component turns out to be too small. Let’s split the DFS run into two: first we compute the size of the interior equating hazards to walls, and then, if it’s large enough, we check for hazards. This removes a short-circuit check, but since most components are eliminated faster, in the end this boosts performance.
let
mut
fast_path_dfs
= |node: (
i32
,
i32
)| {
    region_size +=
1
;
for
(dx, dz)
in
[(-
1
,
0
), (
1
,
0
), (
0
, -
1
), (
0
,
1
)] {
let
node1
= (node.
0
+ dx, node.
1
+ dz);
if
visited.
insert
(node1) &&
is_interior
(node1) {
dfs
(node1);
        }
    }
};
let
mut
slow_path_dfs
= ;
if
fast_path_dfs
((x, z)) && region_size >= CUTOFF &&
slow_path_dfs
((x, z)).
is_ok
() {
    
}
A lower-level example of this optimization is DFS itself. Tracking visited nodes in a
HashSet
is slow even with a custom hash, but as most components are small, we can use a bitset which just enough bits for cells close to the starting point. If we stay inbounds, we get good cache locality. If we occasionally get out of bounds, we restart DFS with a
HashSet
.
fn
insert
(set: &
mut
[
u32
;
32
], (x, z): (
i32
,
i32
))
->
bool
{
let
row
= &
mut
set[z
as
usize
&
31
];
let
bit
= x
as
usize
&
31
;
let
is_new
= (*row >> bit) &
1
==
0
;
    *row |=
1
<< bit;
    is_new
}
The
x
and
z
values here are the actual coordinates, not offsets from the start – masking bits is cheaper than subtraction, and for shifts it’s free. The fact that a row takes
32
bits
as opposed to
32
bytes
also means that the address of
row
can be computed as
set + (z & 31) * 4
, which is an addressing mode x86 supports directly.
In fact, we can avoid the per-cell overflow check entirely. Due to masking, memory accesses never cause UB, so the worst thing that can happen is skipping some cells on wrap-around. If DFS computes the component size as
≥
32
, there might have been some aliasing, so we restart with a
HashSet
. Otherwise, we can trust the count.
Alternatively, we can guarantee no wrap-around if there’s an empty row and a column. This check fails more rarely, but is more expensive, so it’s not the best choice.
Such a bitset with occasional false positives is tangentially related to
Bloom filters
. Just putting this here for completeness – look it up if you haven’t heard of it before.
DFS
The only thing left to optimize is the DFS itself, and I left it for last because it’s a broad topic. The first step is to rewrite DFS to be iterative (BFS-style) rather than recursive:
let
mut
stack
=
Vec
::
new
();


visited.
clear
();
visited.
insert
(coords);
region_size =
0
;
stack.
clear
();

stack.
push
(coords);
while
let
Some
(coords) = stack.
pop
() {
if
!
is_interior
(coords) {
continue
;
    }

    region_size +=
1
;
for
(dx, dz)
in
[(-
1
,
0
), (
1
,
0
), (
0
, -
1
), (
0
,
1
)] {
let
coords1
= (coords.
0
+ dx, coords.
1
+ dz);
if
visited.
insert
(&coords1) {
            stack.
push
(coords1);
        }
    }
}
But be careful: in my experience, iterative DFS is often slower than recursive DFS. This seems to be a common experience in the competitive programming community for reasons I don’t really understand. Here’s some of my hypotheses:
Recursive DFS keeps track of nodes on the path from root to the current vertex, whereas iterative DFS also stores the direct children of such nodes on the stack.
If the DFS has early returns (like ours had with hazards), recursive DFS triggers them early, whereas iterative DFS has already pushed quite a few more nodes.
Allocating the stack on the heap might be slower than using an existing stack.
In this case, though, iterative DFS enables another optimization. We don’t necessarily need depth-first order, and, surprisingly, this enables vectorization! Instead of popping one cell on each iteration, we can pop
8
cells, invoke vectorized
is_interior
just once, and then only handle the rare filtered interior cells sequentially:
while
!stack.
is_empty
() {
let
coords
= stack.
pop_at_most_eight
();
for
coords_index
in
BitIter::
from
(
is_interior
(coords)) {
let
coords
= coords[coords_index];
        region_size +=
1
;
for
(dx, dz)
in
[(-
1
,
0
), (
1
,
0
), (
0
, -
1
), (
0
,
1
)] {
let
coords1
= (coords.
0
+ dx, coords.
1
+ dz);
if
visited.
insert
(&coords1) {
                stack.
push
(coords1);
            }
        }
    }
}
For narrow graphs, we could often have to handle fewer than
8
nodes at once, but since we’re on a grid, this is not an issue.
Finally, we can apply unrolling. The first iteration always pops the interior cell on the diagonal and pushes its four neighbors, and the second iteration immediately pops them, so let’s just start DFS from that point:
let
mut
coords
= [(-
1
,
0
), (
1
,
0
), (
0
, -
1
), (
0
,
1
)].
map
(|(dx, dz)| (coords.
0
+ dx, coords.
1
+ dz))
    + [(
i32
::MAX,
i32
::MAX);
4
];

region_size =
1
;
stack.
clear
();
loop
{
for
coords_index
in
BitIter::
from
(
is_interior
(coords)) {
let
coords
= coords[coords_index];
        region_size +=
1
;
for
(dx, dz)
in
[(-
1
,
0
), (
1
,
0
), (
0
, -
1
), (
0
,
1
)] {
let
coords1
= (coords.
0
+ dx, coords.
1
+ dz);
if
visited.
insert
(&coords1) {
                stack.
push
(coords1);
            }
        }
    }
if
stack.
is_empty
() {
break
;
    }
    coords = stack.
pop_at_most_eight
();
}
In the common case, when the interior cell is surrounded on all sides, this lets us avoid touching stack, which removes the delay from failed store-to-load forwarding.
Stack layout
Now that high-level algorithms are fixed, we can optimize minor details, such as the
stack
data structure. Since
is_interior
wants X and Z coordinates in two separate vectors, we’ll actually need two stacks, one for X and one for Z.
Since vectors have a fixed size (
i32x8
, in this case),
pop_at_most_eight
needs to somehow handle the case when there are fewer than
8
elements in the stack. By adding
7
sentinel elements before the actual stack elements, we ensure that reading
i32x8
always works correctly:
let
mut
x_stack
= [SENTINEL;
7
+
32
*
32
];
let
mut
z_stack
= [SENTINEL;
7
+
32
*
32
];
let
x
= i32x8::
from_slice
(&x_stack[
7
+ stack_size -
8
..
7
+ stack_size]);
let
z
= i32x8::
from_slice
(&z_stack[
7
+ stack_size -
8
..
7
+ stack_size]);
stack_size = stack_size.
saturating_sub
(
8
);
Once initialized, sentinels are never overwritten, as the stack size saturates at
0
.
(i32::MIN, i32::MIN)
, which is outside the world border and thus non-interior, works as a sentinel that we don’t need to special-case. If there wasn’t such a natural sentinel, we could still search for some non-interior cell greedily and then use its coordinates.
Conclusion
And that about sums it up. I could add parallelization, but it’s much easier to just run the single-threaded program on different seeds in parallel.
The code incorporating most of these optimizations can be found
on my GitHub
. The final project searches through the whole world in about a month in single-threaded mode. That’s about
1.5
⋅
10
9
cell area covered in a second (not all of those cells are actually computed, as we only probe diagonals).
To put this into perspective, that’s roughly the speed of summing up integers with scalar code. Here’s the list of tricks we’ve used to optimize a non-trivial analysis of a procedurally generated map this much:
We simplified the problem to a well-known one (component labeling on a grid), formalizing the goal and making it approachable in the first place.
Skipped unnecessary work by utilizing the pattern of the particular variation of the problem at hand (checking diagonals only).
Vectorized independent calculations (diagonals) and calculations that could be made independent with modifications (DFS).
Lowered complexity by reducing float arithmetic to integers.
Tuned data structures to map onto machine capabilities (
visited
as
[u32; 32]
).
Kicked general-purpose implementations as far down the road as possible out of the hot path (unrolled first iterations and removed some memory accesses from DFS, moved hazard checks out of the main DFS loop).
Applied approach-agnostic optimizations (multi-threading and using multiple computers) at a late point where it doesn’t affect logic-heavy code.
This bullet list can act as a checklist for your projects: see if you’ve utilized all of these approaches, and if you can’t instantly name examples from your own experience where you’ve applied these tricks, focus on improving your skills by focusing on that topic.
