---
source: refactoringenglish.com
url: https://refactoringenglish.com/excerpts/rules-for-software-tutorials/
title: Rules for Writing Software Tutorials
author: Michael Lynch
date_published: 2025-01-02
date_scraped: 2026-06-17
description: It's easier than you think to write an exceptional software tutorial. You can stand out in a sea of mediocre guides by following a few simple rules.
---

# Rules for Writing Software Tutorials

Rules for Writing Software Tutorials by Michael Lynch , published January 2, 2025, last revised January 31, 2025 Most software tutorials are tragically flawed. Tutorials often forget to mention some key detail, preventing readers from replicating the author s process. Other times, the author brings in hidden assumptions that don t match their readers expectations. The good news is that it s easier than you think to write an exceptional software tutorial. You can stand out in a sea of mediocre guides by following a few simple rules. Rules 🔗 Write for beginners Promise a clear outcome in the title Explain the goal in the introduction Show the end result Make code snippets copy/pasteable Use long versions of command-line flags Separate user-defined values from reusable logic Use unambiguous example values Spare the reader from mindless tasks Keep your code in a working state Teach one thing Don t try to look pretty Minimize dependencies Specify filenames clearly Use consistent, descriptive headings Demonstrate that your solution works Link to a complete example Write for beginners 🔗 The most common mistake tutorials make is explaining beginner-level concepts using expert-level terminology. Most people who seek out tutorials are beginners. They may not be beginners to programming, but they re beginners to the domain they re trying to learn about. Bad: Refer to concepts that beginners won t understand In this tutorial, I ll show you how to create your first Hello world SPA using React. Open the included hello.jsx file and change the greeting from "Hello world" to "Hello universe" . The browser should hot reload with the new text. Because of React s efficient JSX transpilation, the change feels instant. The browser doesn t even have to soft reload the page because React s reconciliation engine compares the virtual DOM to the rendered DOM and updates only the DOM elements that require changes. The above example would confuse and alienate beginners. A developer who s new to the React web framework won t understand terms like JSX transpilation or reconciliation engine. They probably also won t understand SPA, soft reload, or virtual DOM unless they ve worked with other JavaScript frameworks. When you re writing a tutorial, remember that you re explaining things to a non-expert. Avoid jargon, abbreviations, or terms that would be meaningless to a newcomer. Here s an introduction to a React tutorial that uses language most readers will understand, even if they have no background in programming: Good: Use terms that make sense to beginners In this tutorial, I ll show you how to create a simple webpage using modern web development tools. To generate the website, I m using React, a free and popular tool for building websites. React is a great tool for creating your first website, but it s also full-featured and powerful enough to build sophisticated apps that serve millions of users. Writing for beginners doesn t mean alienating everyone with more experience. A knowledgeable reader can scan your tutorial and skip the information they already know, but a beginner can t read a guide for experts. Promise a clear outcome in the title 🔗 If a prospective reader is Googling a problem, would the title of your article lead them to the solution? If they see your tutorial on social media or in a newsletter, will your title convince them it s worth clicking? Consider the following weak titles: A Complete Guide to Becoming a Python CSV Ninja How to Build Your Own Twitter Key Mime Pi: A Cool Gadget You Can Make How to Make a Compiler The above examples are poor titles because they re vague. From the titles alone, you d be hard-pressed to say what they d teach you. A tutorial s title should explain succinctly what the reader can expect to achieve by following your guide. Here are clearer rewrites of the previous titles: Good: Use titles that promise a clear outcome How to Read a CSV File in Python Build a Real-Time Twitter Clone in 15 Minutes with Phoenix LiveView Key Mime Pi: Turn Your Raspberry Pi into a Remote Keyboard How to Write a C Compiler in 500 Lines of Python These titles give you a clear sense of what you d learn by reading the tutorial. The titles are clear and specific in what the tutorial delivers. Explain the goal in the introduction 🔗 If the reader clicks your tutorial, you re off to a great start. Someone is interested in what you have to say. But you still have to convince them to continue reading. As the reader begins a tutorial, they re trying to answer two critical questions as quickly as possible: Should I care about this technology? If I care, is this the right tutorial for me? The first few sentences of your article should answer those questions. For example, if you were writing a tutorial about how to use Docker containers, this would be a terrible introduction: An Introduction to Docker Containers 🔗 Docker is an extremely powerful and versatile technology. It allows you to run your app in a container, which means that it s separate from everything else on the system. In this tutorial, I ll show you how to use Docker to run containers on your internal infrastructure as well as in the cloud. Based on the above introduction, what problem does Docker solve? Who should use it? The introduction fails to answer those questions and instead hand-waves with vague terms that ignore anything the reader cares about. Here s a rewrite that explains how Docker solves pain points the reader might have: Good: Explain a concrete outcome and benefit How to Use Docker for Reliable App Deployments 🔗 Do you have a production server that you re terrified to touch because nobody knows how to rebuild it if it goes offline? Have you ever torn your hair out trying to figure out why your staging environment behaves differently than your production environment? Docker is a tool for packaging your app so that it has a consistent, reproducible environment wherever it runs. Docker allows you to define your app s environment and dependencies in source code, so you know exactly what s there, even if your app has survived years of tweaks by different teams. In this tutorial, I ll show you how to use Docker to package a simple web app and help you avoid common Docker gotchas. The above introduction explains the problems Docker solves and what the tutorial will deliver. The introduction doesn t say, This tutorial is for people who are brand new to Docker, but it doesn t need to. It introduces Docker as a new concept, which tells the reader that the guide is for newcomers. Show the end result 🔗 As soon as possible, show a working demo or screenshot of what the reader will create by the end of your tutorial. The end result doesn t have to be anything visually stunning. Here s an example of how I showed the terminal UI the user would see at the end of my tutorial: Early in your tutorial, show the reader a preview of what they ll produce by the end. Showing the final product reduces ambiguity about your goal. It helps the reader understand if it s the right guide for them. Make code snippets copy/pasteable 🔗 As the reader follows your tutorial, they ll want to copy/paste your code snippets into their editor or terminal. An astonishing number of tutorials unwittingly break copy/paste functionality, making it difficult for the reader to follow along with their examples. Make shell commands copyable 🔗 One of the most common mistakes authors make in code snippets is including the shell prompt character. A shell snippet with leading $ characters will break when the user tries to paste it into their terminal. $ sudo apt update # Don&#39;t do this! $ sudo apt install vim # Users can&#39;t copy/paste this sequence without $ vim hello.txt # picking up the $ character and breaking the command. Even Google gets this wrong. In some places, their documentation helpfully offers a Copy code sample button. Google offers a “Copy code sample” button that incorrectly copies shell terminal characters. If you click the copy button, it copies the $ terminal prompt character, so you can t paste the code: michael@ubuntu: $ gcloud services enable pubsub.googleapis.com $ gcloud services disable pubsub.googleapis.com bash: $: command not found bash: $: command not found michael@ubuntu: There s a different version of this copy/paste error that s more subtle: Bad: Present a sequence of commands that require user input sudo apt update sudo apt install software-properties-common sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa sudo apt install python3.9 If I try to paste the above snippet, here s what I see in the terminal: 0 upgraded, 89 newly installed, 0 to remove and 2 not upgraded. Need to get 36.1 MB of archives. After this operation, 150 MB of additional disk space will be used. Do you want to continue? [Y/n] Abort. $ What happened? When the apt install software-properties-common command executes, it prompts the user for input. The user can t answer the prompt because apt just continues reading from the clipboard paste. Most command-line tools offer flags or environment variables to avoid forcing the user to respond interactively. Use non-interactive flags to make command snippets easy for the user to paste into their terminal. Good: Use command-line flags that avoid interactive user input sudo apt update sudo apt install --yes software-properties-common sudo add-apt-repository --yes ppa:deadsnakes/ppa sudo apt install --yes python3.9 Join shell commands with && 🔗 Take another look at the Python installation example I showed above, as it has a second problem: Bad: Ignore failing commands sudo apt update sudo apt install software-properties-common sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa sudo apt install python3.9 If one of the commands fails, the user might not notice. For example, if the first command was sudo apt cache ppa:dummy:non-existent , that command would fail, but the shell would happily execute the next command as if everything was fine. In most Linux shells, you can join commands with && and continue lines with a backslash. That tells the shell to stop when any command fails. Here s the user-friendly way to include a series of copy-pasteable commands: Good: Chain commands together with && sudo apt update \ sudo apt install --yes software-properties-common \ sudo add-apt-repository --yes ppa:deadsnakes/ppa \ sudo apt install --yes python3.9 The user can copy/paste the entire sequence without having to tinker with it in an intermediate step. If any of the commands fail, the sequence stops immediately. Only show the shell prompt to demonstrate output 🔗 Occasionally, showing the shell prompt character benefits the reader. If you show a command and its expected output, the shell prompt character helps the reader distinguish between what they type and what the command returns. For example, a tutorial about the jq utility might present results like this: Good: Use the shell prompt character to distinguish between a command and its output The jq utility allows you to restructure JSON data elegantly: $ curl \ --silent \ --show-error \ https://status.supabase.com/api/v2/summary.json | \ jq &#39;.components[] | {name, status}&#39; { &#34;name&#34; : &#34;Analytics&#34; , &#34;status&#34; : &#34;operational&#34; } { &#34;name&#34; : &#34;API Gateway&#34; , &#34;status&#34; : &#34;operational&#34; } ... Exclude line numbers from copyable text 🔗 It s fine to include line numbers alongside your code snippets, but make sure they don t break copy/paste. For example, if the user tries to copy the count_tables function from the following snippet, they d have to remove line numbers from their pasted text. Bad: Include line numbers in copyable text 123 def count_tables (form): 124 if not form: 125 return None Use long versions of command-line flags 🔗 Command-line utilities often have two versions of the same flag: a short version and a long version. -r / --recursive : Run recursively ^ ^ | | | long flag | short flag Always use long flags in tutorial